Om offering my sashtangaskcarams at the lotus feet of our guru S Mahasanam and Sri Sidanam and also to all my other gurus my manuhan Swami G and all gurus. I am starting this third round of Shrimat Bhagavat Gita lectures. When I was in Shingiri recently I sought the anugraham of both the acharas for me to go ahead and do the third round of Bhagavat Gita and also the second round of both the dashopish and the brahmasutras and often I will also do some pracaras which have been done already and now Bhagavat Gita was the one which we chose to do first because of popular demand by a lot of people who wanted to again see Bhagavat Gita and among the three prstthanas prstthana trias our shrithana is the dashas the 10 upishas and then brahmasudas that is called nyaya prstana and bhagavat gita is called smriti prstthana all three are authoritarian texts which expound the tenets of our tradition and our vanta but we are going to approach Bhagavad Gita as we done earlier from a different angle more from the Vantic angle. It will not be just a literal meaning of these shlokas. We will also approach it from the Vanta angle. We will mention a few things initially to help us understand the Vantic terms and here the topic that we are going to discuss is selfnowledge the true nature of oneself atam and in this case why should we explore this nature of oneself is because we do not know what is our own nature and how to know this in the prarana Ask the question and he gives the answer that is the va the knowledge of the self. The atma that alone is real and all others are all mitya. In short we learned the nature of the self in tatada. And we also know tata gives the essence of vanta which is the end portion of the vedas. It is called vedanta because it is kept at the end of the vedasa. That means if the end portion deals with self-nowledge then the naturally the question will be what is the beginning portion the pura that deals with. So we have to ask that question. Now let us see how the tu approaches this here. He says the self-nowledge is taught to those who got the even though I'm using lot of Sanskrit terms now I will give the meanings for each of them as we go along and then we'll be fairly comfortable as we go further. Who is called the adikari or the eligible and what are those conditions for him to be eligible to learn this vanta he should have vivea va means the discriminative ability discrimination where one can distinguish between what is atma and what is anatma what is not atma and vaya vaya is this passion this detachment with respect to what With respect to the fruits of the action karma palam we do lot of karma but with respect to the fruits of the action we should have dispassion detachment and shka sympathy this is a group of shamad shka sympathy six items called shama is mind control dhama control of external sense organs uparama observance of one's own duty soda And tita is endurance between hot and cold, pleasure and pain in all of those conditions. Tika and shara is the faith in the words of the guru or the scriptures because guru talks only what is given in the scriptures. He's not telling any of himself. So what is given in the scriptures alone he teaches. So one should have unconditional faith in the guru and the scriptures and the samadhanam that is the single pointedness of the mind, focus of the mind. These six are called shka sati. And the fourth one is mumukwam. The craving desire to attain moka. And these are the four which are called sadhanai. But the text does not say how to acquire these qualities. How to acquire this eligibility. It does not talk. If all people in the world are eligible, then vanta alone is in is adequate for all the other things are not needed. There is no need for bhagavad any puranas any other things there's no need for any so in short if a person wants moka I need self-nowledge I need to know who I am and if I need self-nowledge I should be an adikari the eligible adikari here means not the boss I should be the eligible the person who can receive that knowledge And if I'm not how to acquire that eligibility that is the question I hope you are you are with me in the development. So if I want moka I need self-nowledge. I should know who I am. And if I need self-nowledge I should be an adikari or the eligible person. And if I am not an eligible person now how to acquire the eligibility is the question. So the real problem is what is not in self-nowledge but in becoming a qualified individual with a prepared mind to receive self-nowledge and that is the problem not self-nowledge itself that means we can see the whole veda actually in two stages one is called the pura already I mentioned the antabara the pura it never talks about certain knowledge at all the beginning portion the prior portion but it helps in getting all these things va Vaya, sha sati and all that and the vdanta part the later part that deals with self-nowledge and the purhaga is like an entrance exam. It is by itself not a degree exam only to enter into the college you have to go to those screening degree exams a separate one to get the qualification similarly veura makes a personari a fit person to learn vdanta. Once he is fit he can enter into vdanta so that he can prepare for moka. Moka is the only goal ultimate goal for a person to get out of the cycle of birth and death. So like a doctor for example he wants to do an operation on a patient he first checks the fitness of the person for the surgery secondary shows requiring control like diabetes pressure All those things they all have to be treated prior to doing the surgery. Here also we all require two treatments. The primary cure is vantic operation. Since we are not fit the vea doctor prescribes the medicine for the secondary illness make us fit so that we'll become adikari to gain that knowledge. Adikari means the eligible. Then we take the vdanta treatment. which removes the primary disease of what aamanum is ignorance basic ignorance of ourselves. Cut off again to get moka. This is the simple words in terms of how to make oneself eligible to approach the path towards mara and to gain and for this purpose that is the aikari to be prepared fit. Mind Veda prescribes two types of sadness. One is karma activity various actions. You do lot of actions various actions and these actions themselves I'm going through in a in a slightly fast pace because these are introduction to prepare ourselves to the to the actual subject of Bhagat Gita. So karma activity that is also divided into two parts. One is called karma worldly actions and another one is vika karma. The loi karma also is subdivided into two sakama karma and nishkama karma. And the same way vika karma also is divided into sakama karma and nishkama karma. I will explain that sakama karma for example various things the various actions are prayer doing work so many other services all those things social service many of these things are all karma worldly actions a person can do either with the desire in mind with some benefit in mind sakama or nishkama without any benefit for oneself without any selfishness all these are good actions prayer is good action working for society is good actions social services all these and in the vika karma there also sakama are there for example I observing many of the vic rituals doing for example karma karma for our ancestors Many of those things and also doing so many other things they are all coming under the va and that also can be done with for example if I do shadam I will get this benefit and if I do this karma I'll get this benefit one can think all that or one can think of it asama this is my duty to perform and what is the definition of duty you don't expect a reward duty is duty a person has to do it one cannot expect an reward for it. And what is sakama karma? All actions are done to get worldly results like name, fame, wealth, health, children. All those things are all the sakama karma in the loika field in the worldly kmas and leads a person from what it does from one bondage to another desire. It increases more and more another bondage. So karma to karma to ka I got $1 million. I want work to get $10 million. And from this karma to that ka binding this desire continuous bondage continues. And when the very same karma is done as nishkama without expecting anything out of it without interest in worldly things like a simple offering to the lord or with an attitude of duty whatever action I do I do it as an offering to the lord. I do it is I don't do it for my benefit expecting something or I do it with a sense of duty. Even if he's an atheist, if he doesn't believe in God, he can just do it as his duty. So whether I get reward or not with a sense of detachment, the very same karma will lead to by ragam or this passion. The second thing which I va and then by ra. So in summary, sakama karma leads to attachment that is called ra Not the katic music raa this is raa here is attachment and nishkama karma leads to viraa detachment. So any karma can be done either sakama or rishama and sagama karma leads to attachment. Nishkama karma leads to detachment. So per vanta we need all these things to qualify oneself. And vangyam this passion or detachment is one of the four-fold qualifications that I mentioned just now. in the sad sati and nishkama karma is more popularly known as karma yoga. So the same karma karma being the same only the attitude is different one is expecting a return and that becomes a mere karma and the person who does it is a ki and the person who does it without expecting any reward and do does it as a duty or as an offering to the lord The same karma becomes a karma yoga and the person who does it with that attitude he becomes a karma yogi. Thus a person can use the veda purwa the prayer portion of the vedas for rituals and what will decide whether the ritual is sak or nishkama. I do a puja I do ana I do so many things. What will decide whether that karma is done with as sakama or nishama? How how will you make it out? The salpa the person when he does a salpa for doing a karma that will determine what he has in mind all those things he's putting a big list so when he does salpa if he includes all of them and in that list there'll be no mention of moka at all I want to get moka will not be there at all these will be there and so for whom also it is not for public or anybody sum for all for me my father-in-law, brother-in-law, my children, you include everybody. Buy a $10 ticket or China and include everybody on earth. So this is he will not do it for neighbors. It will be all for his own reli. But if it is done for I want to do this I don't want any no worldly results. I want that is done a person when he does it and that that leads to a karma yoga. So va puruha the karmakandanda portion of vedas it talks karma which can be used with the proper attitude. So where the purup bha refers to karmakanda which tells about so much of karma and deals with the part. So karm yoga palam is what what is the benefit of karma yoga vyam this passion no discussions now since the entire The Bhagavat Gita talks about this. We have got a whole chapter karm yoga third chapter. We are going to see it in detail. Then I only just giving making the stage um conformal with what we are going to learn and vaga is known by another word called chittashudi. See without our knowledge I'm including introducing more and more vantic terms. So we learned karma from karma to karma yoga. We learned now from karm yoga that it gives vaya and vaya has another name chitta shudi. Chitta means mind. Sudhi means purity. So when it is the karma is done with this attitude. When the person gains vaga it leads to that is what fortudi we need to do karma. But with attitude what attitude we have to know. So is purity of mind because raa is impurity and mind. Raa is means what? Attachment. Attachment is impurity in mind. by detachment is purity of mind. So attachment is impurity and detachment is purity. So the moment we say so many things we are attached to what I call them are impurities and detachment is purity the prior portion of Va it talks about another type of sadena called upasana. So far we talked about karma in nutshell and now another sadhana is called upasana meditation on various gods. on or divine principles. You can meditate on anything you can any god you want. For example, the janna of any mantra all any of them there's a janna where you imagine where vishnu is seated and all that all the ocean of milk he seated he is there beautiful place of vishnu that is set there the aam where he sits it's a wonderful stand all the talks about all these descriptions are given for a person to meditate upon that mahavishnu who is endored with all these things which we the way the way he seated the way he what he's conducting all that so there is we don't do anything no action is done but mentally visualize the lord that is called upasana so you can sura you can do you can do wankar upasana you can do there are so the first five chapters Chandra talks about so many of these and various upas are also given on Rama Krishna anybody one can you can do upasana meditation on all of them and what is the difference between karma and upasana karma is more physical in formasana involves the mind karma is physical in form this in upasana involves the mind so the upasanas also again like karma are of two types one is For example, if you take the when you recite, there is a at the end. It tells what are the benefits a person will get by reciting Vishnu. Dhari dharma. A person who is interested in dharma, he will get dharma. A person who wants attend all that thing he gets that. So whatever kama a person has all will be accomplished. This is sakama expecting something. In return for doing the upasana on Mahabishna and one who wants karma puna he will get pun and who wants money he will get money who wants to fulfill so many desires house job promotion all that they will all get them also and who wants children will get them these are all sakama and here we make use of upasana to get worldly benefits so it is sakasana but the same can be done with nishkamasana also without expecting any It will give another benefit. It will what is the benefit that will give that is mind control sense control all that I told all that it will so the also known as mind is steady It is not moving. Mind is not vacillating steadiness of the mind. It will give by the supasana if it is done in this manner. So karma yoga gives chitudi. We already mentioned karma ordinary karma gives benefits. Karma yoga gives chitudi purity of the mind and upasana it gives what? Steadiness mind if it is done without any. So once a person follows where the pura or the karmak and upasana and all that he will becomear fit person. So this is how to get the eligibility to become fit for and then go through to gain moka. These are all for what to gain moka ultimately that is the goal in life. Once the person becomes an adikari with a pure and steady mind Then that person can be lifted to vanta properly. Till that time vanta will not sink into him. There'll be lot of he'll be listening to so many things. He knows me. He doesn't know more than their words. That's it. Both are needed. Purity and steady of mind because for example if you want to draw a chitra on a paper or something on a board the board must be first clean. It should be clean first and then it should be firm. It should not be also dangling. So if you want to put a right draw a picture or something on a on a board drawing board the board should be clean first and then it should be firm. Clean is firm is steadiness. Similarly if the vdanta teacher wants to write wisdom on the mind of the student but mind is like a board writing board it is full of raa. Raa means impurity. I told Already attachment is impurity and teacher cannot write with a on a board which is impure. He will not enter into the mind. It will not enter into the mind due to the thick impur that is there. Our impurities are gained when several thousands of jas if I become I won't be here now. Right? So that way several jmas we have already taken and in each jma we have acquired so Many of these impurities and they are all some are exhausted some are not. So all are there. It's a big cred that is there in the mind of everybody very thick very thick impurity. So karm yoga will help clean the mind and even if pure even if it is pure but not steady it is also of no use. Mind will wander here and there because the nature of mind is to oscillate. It is not going to be ready. It'll be always going here and should I do this? Should I not do that? Right from going to the restaurant to eat something which masala dosa everywhere the discussion never stops. So upasana will fix the mind make the mind steady meditation will make the mind steady. So karma karma yoga all these we have seen and the benefits of each other and that is why in the in the tuha these things for all these are this actually we call tuha as Vedantic primer for a person to know Vanta he has to study vanta he should know the vantic terms and what they all mean and how to go about achieving them. So we can see the entire Vic literature as whole addresses three stages. What are three stages? Karma karma with an attitude of karm yoga. It gives chitty purity of mind. Upasana again same way steiness of the mind and Third is vanta that gives atma nature of oneself. Who am I? These are the three things. So these are three stages everyone has to go through to reach where moka to go to mosha. Moska is the place you want to get ticket on that. This is what one has to do. These three karma and vanta this is called viga prescribed for reaching motion. Now this basic teaching available in Shruti in the Vedasi means Vedas where they were later elaborated by the rishies through another set of texts called the smitis. Because as I mentioned many times earlier you might have heard also some of you that the Vedas are called. They are like the clouds. They are there not easy to comprehend. It will say order you follow dharma and then speak the truth. truth but to what extent this truth has to be followed people cannot directly understand. So there is a granta with Harishandra the story of Harishandra in the purana which tells to what extent a person went to maintain satyam satya up to that how much he went. So this is the this puranic literature all those things they smiti literatures they all give the elucidation of the The truth that is in the Vedas for people to understand, comprehend and follow. There are parasiti by parasi paras manusmi we are all very familiar with that man after manuagi more grantas are there. So these smuty means from the memory whatever you learn from the vedas you bring it to the memory and express it in a way that common man can understand it is for the common man and there all the stories all those things. So these rishies they did not contribute anything original themselves but they remembered what they learned from the Vedas and they expressed in their own language the content in the form of is from the Vedas only. So Veda is par to student to student to student like teacher to student all that thing that has been all going those days there was no print there is no nothing like print media this and that and all were not books are not there this all from teacher to student to student it continues And smi is remembered and propagated. Whatever the teacher taught, one learns, remembers and propagates. They become smi. Later they found that smitis are not also adequate. Since as bhagavatam says in bhavatam these are all things I'm just only alluding in kaluga where we are now living people will be dwitted. We can be we can definitely give ourselves highest marks for all that. Mandabi says we are people with mandabi. because lot of distractions so many distractions TV radio so many things are there all over the place so abstract principles like self-nowledge Brahman etc is difficult to grasp in kaly yoga so puranas cameras from vedas to smrasi and then puranas purana all these puranas of the purana so many of them so the glory of the purana is what All abstract ideas are given concrete shapes. When Veda says an abstract idea, it is given a concrete shape for a person to follow. So all positive virtues are embodied embodied as theyas. All negative aspects in a person all in a person they are portrayed as assuras and truth is always given as God in some form. The truth is always given in the form of some god any god and the knowledge as sarasati and wealth as lakshmi they portray all these things to give an embodiment for that concept knowledge as a concept truth as a concept wealth as a concept and that is a thing that a thing that is the purity which gives no virtues and abstract values were personified in the piranhas each value was taught through a story also for example Satya as I mentioned Harishandra Dhamara he followed Dharma even at the most excruciating circumstances and Gurubaki how how much bi he had on his guru and paripam to follow the words of the father Rama so all these stories were brought essentially to make people understand the values and to what extent one has to follow those value systems in day-to-day life Similarly for negative concepts also for kama raana is portrayed in ramayana koda dura is a money he is a great money but he was portrayed as a person as a with lot of anger grow so puranas are many each with thousands of slokas each purana has scandura is a very big puran lot of lot of slokas they are all based on shriy only vedas only shy means vedas so all puranas are written based on vedas they don't say everything of themselves all based on Vedas. Then came theasas which are partly fact and partly fiction. For example many if you take a movie story also there is one writer and the writer he got an idea where he got the idea from maybe there was a fight going on his own house or the neighbor's house or some friend's house and he takes that and he add characters to that he put a hero he puts a hero in and then or maybe a jester a guy who is a joker or All that thing he put to build into something called a movie and then we are all fascinated by the story that comes from that all from only from small small beginnings somewhere. So the purpose of is not history but teachings of va. So we should not think that even though it brings lot of because for a purana it has to satisfy so many so many requirements in that geography history all will be there but the teaching is not to teach them their byproducts incidental benefits but Mara is what they all wanted to portray. Mara means the way that is given in the Vedas that is Vic Mara that is for what? To gain motion that only addresses a person to gain motion. So twoasas are there Ramayana by Walmiki and Mahavara by Vasa and all these grantas all these text they all have three stages. They are laid out very clearly in all of them. the mind and vanta here and there not consistently because they are not vantic just proper text. So wherever they bring a story in the purana they will also bring the concept of vanta there but it's thrown over all over in the entire in their purana or the so it is a in a sugarcoated capsule form they will give all the stories good and bad and all that thing and then they will give a principle of vanta in the midst of the story in Ramayana karma and upasana were mentioned many times and vant only occasionally for example vayim of Rama detachment and one day he got the kingdom and next day he has to go to forest and in both the cases how he conducted himself. So these are all instances through which a person even though they are realities that happened the concept of vanta also how to build vraim and all they were also taught through them. Similar in mahabhara also all the three stages of the vic mara are mentioned in detail in the mahabharata The Bhagavat Gita gives the same approach also. So we took theasas puranas all of them. Now we are coming to Bhagavat Gita because that's the topic. So in Bhagavat Gita also it is and there is the development of the story in the first chapter itself certain situation is brought in there is the two armies are facing each other and at that at that time Arjuna he has all these doubts and Krishna brings him to the he he wants to be in the in in in the middle of the battlefield between the two armies and Krishna builds them right in the in the middle and the story he sets the stage for the story and the aim is to bring the student to a teacher so that wisdom can be given that is the reason Arjuna has to now understand he is not any any king or anybody he wants he has to be a student to ask the knowledge to beg for to pray for the knowledge from the lord Krishna normally as in in many vantic texts there should have been a mangala or dana slokum also for bhagavat gita because bhagavat gita we are seeing that's a separate text even though it's part of mahabharat but every text all all text that we take in vanta or anything they have a mangala dana vishnam already I told they are all there but here there is no dylo for bhagatita at all written by vasa there is no danlo by vasa for bhagatita so Vas Dhanloka occurs in the beginning of where Mahabharata itself Mahabharata is 100,000 shlokas very big gr one lakh and then in that granta it is he has given the the Ghana shloka mangal shloka and no separate shloka was given for for Bhagavat Gita itself by Vedasa naturally Vasa wrote the only the Mahabharata and Bhagavat Gita is only a part of it That is the shloka he wrote. Then the Mahabharata begins. Mahabharata text begins after he wrote this shloka in the middle of 100,000 shlokas. The Bhagavat Gita is only a drop of 700 shlokas only. 100,000 shlokas are there in Mahabharatam in which Bhagavat Gita is only having 700 shlokas, not even 1,000. and a few chapters 18 chapters only. Then people were reading the those days the people were reading the entire param those days that was all very easy for them. Later people for want of time or want of attention want of sinc whatever it is started to read only the Bhagavat Gita and so a separate Danloka became necessary. So in the entire Mahabharata they took only this Bhagavat Gita portion and the Vishnuam portion they wanted to read only those things. So a separate Janus sloka was necessary. So a recent acharia madusi actually belonging to 16th or 17th century he wrote the dhan shlokas which became very popular. So the dhanlo for bhagat gita were not written by vavasa they were written by another swami that is mazuda sarasati. He is the recent achara 16th 17th century and he wrote the dhanloas. and they became very popular for Bhagavat Gita and the purpose of the janaka is for the successful completion of the study without any obstacles. I am now got into the study of Bhagavat Gita. I want to complete all 18 chapters 700 shlokas. I don't want to have any obstacles or anything. Let this study continue without any obstruction and let me complete it successfully. So that is the prayer. So for that the Mangaloka Dhanloka is written. So now We will start with the dhanlo shlokas for Bhagavat Gita. This I already taught all of them but I'm going to now again read it here and give the meaning for it fully. The first This is the first dhana shloka in for Bhagavat Gita written by Madula Sarasati and some of the shlokas are prostrations for Bhagavat Gita among the Dhanlokas. Some of them are prostrations for Bhagavat Gita as goddess mother like Bharat Mata Mata. So Bhagavat Gita Mata here. So to do Namaskar to Bhagavat Gita and some for Mahabharam itself the entire Mahabharata text also and most of the namaskcaras are to Lord Krishna and some are for vehas. So among the various dhanlokas we are going to read we are going to see all these aspects and first one is to Bhagavat Gita itself the as a mother. So in Sanskrit Gita the term Gita is feminine gender. So Mother is well known for love and gives whatever is necessary for the child according to its growth. The mother loves the child but she likes to one year old kid she won't feed the food of a 15y old youth. She thinking that the child has to become immediately the youth never. So for a 2 year old child she feeds whatever that child can take and digest and the child grows if she gives more and she gives more healthy food. This the child child can digest. also. So like that the mother knows what the child wants and accordingly she gives the food also according to the age and the and the ability of the child to to digest them. Gita also is like motherhita does not give the same advice to everyone takes into account the evolution. Some are some people are very gross to them Gita it will teach eat properly for them they are happy with that sleep properly. For those people We are going to see all the so it is talking about all these locas for such people who are not very mature yet fundamental teaching is given even maintenance of the body how one has to take care of the body what food all that he talks and when a person I'm not giving the meanings in all detail because we are going to see all the slokas in detail there When a person is a little bit advanced for example it teaches a little bit of karma yoga and for the still advanced it even in work all these things will will turn the head of everybody. This person he is the wise person he the wisest among wise. So it talks about all that things and when we understand the meaning we will enjoy it even more. So she is such a mother who can cater to all types of children. We are all her children's children and she knows how to cater to all types of children. And to that mother I prostrate to her. That is this. Now we'll see the the meanings in that addressing samba mother. This is sambod addressing her anus. I will constantly contemplate on you. I will meditate upon you. How? Not as a person. Bhagavad Gita. I think of you as my mother. Correct. But I am not meditating or contemplating on you as a as a person. But meditation is on the content of Bhagavat Gita. What is told in the Bhagavat Gita? I will meditate upon the content. If you remember Bhagavat Gita, most of the problems in life will go away. So I am going to remember you and what type of you the rest of them are description of Bhagavati. The rest of the loca is the description of that Bhagavat Gita. You who are in the form of a teaching given to Arjuna revealed by the lord himself here means Arjuna's mother count is called pria is kunti and kunti's sona's son isa and who is the teacher by himself this is not a human proposition It was taught to you by God Narayana himself. This is not to be approached as Vasa's writing only language is Vasas but content is Bhagavans as valid as Veda itself. That is why Gita is also called it is also like he himself the Lord himself has given it. Every teaching received from any guru is indirectly from Naragana only. Because as I told in the beginning no guru gives anything of his own teaching. It is all what is contained in the scriptures. Starting from age sadasha narayana whatever is given in the scriptures. The teacher taught his student he taught his student like a parumpara. The entire parumpa learning. So when we learn from one guru who belongs to a parumpara we get the richness of the knowledge given by the entire para through him. So that is the reason why we always insist that every Everything has to be learned from your guru only. Every teaching received from any guru is indirectly from one mahasar. So the entire thing that the shloka that tells about all the guru starting from up to my presence as the slo goes even we are receiving the knowledge from the original guru narayhanna only indirectly through the guru para. That is the reverence we give to our gurus. But Arjuna receives directly here. So he's unique. We have to go through all these guru param for him. He is so blessed person. He got it directly from Narayana himself gave him firstand knowledge. Vasa has compiled the teaching and has put in the form of a shloka so that people can remember the entire Bhagavat Gita is all in shloka form. So that people can what is the advantage of keeping a shloka form a poetic form because people can remember it well easily. Krishna might not have taught in the form of shloka perhaps in the battlefield all shastras are only in the words form so that all there is a meter and all of them for all the shlokas so that all rules can be remembered. For example if you think of boil cha and all those things of physics and all these in the form of shloka look at that no confusion will be there and what is puranam has two meanings here. Purana is literature itself. Purana literature puran literature like the puranam scandam and all that thing. Then it also means the sage who is the author of the piranhas. Dictionary meaning here actually ancient one who is very ancient that the puran refers to very ancient. And what did what did he put? How he put the wisdom? Where did he put it? Mahabharatam in the midst of the Mahabharatam. He placed the Bhagat Gita in the midst of the Mahabharatam Mahabharatam text. And what is the content actual content of it? Adita its of all those things. It gives that meaning. So the normal mother can give the children only ordinary water or ordinary milk. But mother Gita gives the milk in the form of Amritam. Why called amitam? Because it gives immortality which contains the knowledge of Brahma. Once the person gets that knowledge, that person doesn't get to be born again. So it is immortality. Bhagavatim who is the goddess Ian one which consists of it consists of 18 chapters means 18 chapters it consists of and it is even that is introduced here right in the janloka itself the achara introduces the content in the form of 18 chapters and what it does so important so nice dhi means enemy chhatru so bhagavat gita is supposed to be the the the is supposed to be the what? The the the enemy of what? Bhava. Bhagavat Gita is supposed to be the enemy of Bhava. Bhava means what? Bhava means samsara. Sorrow. So the sorrow of samsara that is removed by learning Bhagavat Gita. So Bhagavat Gita is considered the enemy of the samsara duka sara. So it's a medicine to samsara like the vanishing of darkness in presence of light. Impress of Bhagavat Gita learning all this darkness of ignorance go away. So if you put Gita wisdom in the mind the enemies like kama croa moa ma matsas they all will vanish all these internal they are all internal they all will vanish if they are there will have no place in those minds. If a person has all these things the not even all these things even whatever will not find a place in that In that mind they may read the words of Bhagat Gita by knowing language but it won't make any impact in them. It is for us to decide what we want to keep. Whether we want to keep Bhagat Gita or we want to keep all these kamakuradis in the mind that is our choice to such a I meditate again and again. This is the meaning of the first dhanloka. As I mentioned the and the meanings. Please keep yourself aligned with those meanings because that will help us when we learn Bhagat Gita later. The second one My prostrations to you. Oh, my prostrations to you. Who the reader? This is because of what your contribution is so great people cannot even even fathom whatever he has he has done. He divided he is the one who divided the veedas into four as we know Sameda ata Otherwise it was very very difficult to study all they were all strewn all over the Vedas were all so they were all so much in all strewn over all the places in so many thousands and thousands and thousands of mantras. So he has he was the one who divided those mantras into four vedas called vea sama and so he called vasaha vasa vasah means they divided he divided the vedas into four And he's not not the author. We should understand that clearly. Vedasa is not the author of Vedas. He is only the divider. For example, the the ser the post office the mails are sorted by the main man. Right? So he's a ster. He he didn't write the mail but he sorted the mail and give given to us. Same way did it to they were already scattered and he divided them. And the original name for Vasa because he was doing parents in the bad So that is the reason he's also called born in an island also. He was born in an island. So means about so he was born in an island. So he's also called so he got viasa and he's also called the Krishna. He was very dark in complexion. So he is called Krishna also. After dividing Vedas he is called Vasa divider. And he returned What did what did he do? He wrote all the puranas. 18 mahab puranas he wrote. Actually one of them was to my father but all he he wrote all of them but he finished it also. So he wrote all the puranas the entire mahabharata with more than 100,000 slokas. So mahabharatam is considered like the fifth vea mahabham is considered pancho ftha. What is not in mahabharatam is cannot be anywhere. That is How you know we we believe in it because there is nothing that is told elsewhere that is not told in Mahabharat anywhere in the world in even in the field of philosophy the very adic philosophy contained in the upanishas has been codified and put as brahma sutras systematically that is the greatness of because to find out the vishaya for each one of the sutras there what is the what the sutra refers show with with only two or three words each sutra that is a great thing and that is where Adishankar he came to our rescue finding the visha came relating to each one of these Brahma sutras and then explaining to them applying them to us. So the very adic philosophy contains condensed in the brahmasutras give only the philosophical statements strewn all over but he took them and compiled them in the form of sutras. So Veda are like flowers. All the vdantic statements are all like flowers. If you read the opishads directly, we will never get any philosophy at all. But it is now in a systematic philosophical form. That is because Vavasam he wrote the Brahma sutras, vasa sutras, vada sutras. Because of that we were able to relate to each one of the punishes and their contents. So for adic philosophy the basis is from Brahma sutras that is the sutra which with all the superishas they contain in it. So it's very very systematic form even talk about it but in a systematic way he put them in the form of brahmas. In addition there is also ai smriti called vasaasmi. So such a great person a person who has done so much to this va dharma. San Dharma. So to that vasa frustrations to him. So this namaskar to the vasa especially now since we are learning Bhagavat Gita now. So if he has to contribute this much how much his intellect should be how that one small head could carry all know somewhere about the village school master how muchas should have very vast intellect he had the See actually poetically it is describing him as a very handsome person but really he supposed to be not even people even calling a little ugly also how he looked like but he is called poetically here very handsome ones whose eyes they are like aravinda a long fully blossomed lotus petal not like lotus leaf Lotus leaf is so big. So it's like even though patam refers to leaf here it is to be taken as petal lotus petal. His eyes were so so like lotus flower. Pula means blossom fully blossom. You have lit up what very shining lamp you have lit up. What it does? It dispers the darkness of ignorance and What type of lamp it is of wisdom especially brings in in between his teachings self-nowledge in the Bhagavat Gita everywhere in all other places in the piranhas everywhere in another portion of the mahabharatam there is a moka dharma that is talked about where he gives self-nowledge also in the bhava purana udita is given I plan to do it if I have time sometime later. And then what is the oil for in the in the deep the mahabharatam itself is like the tail the oil because it gives the context the support for this entire soa has been lit by you has been lit by you byasam and it is such lamp that is still shining that lamp is you lit it So that I'm shining so much to that my prostrations my namaskar to himnations the teacher prostations to Krishna and the rest of the sloka are glory of Krishna who is this Krishna means a mythological tree in heaven. It is a wish giving tree like and so Lord Krishna is for the devotees is like the tree we are going to see the seventh chapter. So Krishna he gives whatever a person desires. Then why only to the devotees he gives? Is he partial? No. The idea is the devotees are the ones who ask others don't. So you have to you have to first knock at the door then only open door opens because the lord also would like to see your shredda whether you believe in him or not. That is a beautiful shloka. We are going to see that also in that shloka when I will Explain that with all this context means the handle of the whip. He is sitting on the on the chariot and the horses are all tied to the chariot. He has the whip to drive the chariot. So that handle of the whip is called the totraetra. So in the driver's position he seat of the chariot and he has in one hand the handle of the whip totra. And why worship him in this form? Why are you thinking of him with the whip in his hand? We will then remember the Bhagavat Gita context where this Gita is there in the battlefield and Krishna having butter and all that. If you think Krishna is stealing butter and all those things when you will be thinking only buttersa perhaps by law of association but we want to think of the Bhagavan Krishna in the battlefield trying to teach Gita in the battlefield ready to try the chariot and what is in the other hand of him He is having the mudra the sign of selfnowledge also called chin mudra or mudra this is how he has the mudra so this is so the thumb is this thumb and is this finger index finger representing the Brahman. So when they are joined together so the ultimate truth the universal self why Brahman is the supporter of this universe a for all. Similarly the thumb is the support of all the fingers without this thumb one cannot function with all the other four fingers independently. Thumb is most important that is like Brahma. Similarly thumb is the supporter of all. So is compared to the purahi means the index finger. represents the ja ja here means the aankara the ego the individual self and it means threatening soji is always I will I will take care of you the way they they say like that so it's a threatening finger the threatening finger arrogance and when they join together so when they both join together it becomes a whole notole they become a whole means total. So if this ja has to join Brahman, one thing is needed. It has to give up its association with the other three fingers. So if this finger has to join with it, it has to give up the association with the other three fingers which represent the three bodies. The solar sharada. Anyway, I will mention some of these some details in our lectures. As long as one is associated with them, This IM is not possible. This will never join with this. So long as the body the symbol of atma detachment of anatma the three fingers and attachment to atman the angaishna one who is dark in colorrishna is also dark. So ethmologically means attraction. So attracts drawing pulling people towards him. Such a And what is the special glory in this context not just in the battlefield and all what he did? He has milked the Gita amitam from where it is not also Krishna's personal teaching even though Krishna is lord it is not his personal teaching but based on Vedas only milk my prostrations to him. S I think now it is 9:30. So we'll stop here with the shloka and then we will continue with the remaining dhana shlokas in the next class and start the first chapter.