Okay. Sarva, Panishadoga, Om, Dogdha, Gopalanandana, Aartho, Vatsatsudhir, Bhokta, Dugdham, Gita, Amrita, Maghatta. So in the previous loka, we said, Gita, Amrita, Duhay. Krishna has milked the Gita, Amrita, Gita, Amrita. When we talk of milking by law of association, we will think of the cow. And the cow means there must be a calf. And then there should be a her-cow, herd, all that. So what is the cow and what is the calf? There is a question here. The imagery is nicely given in this loka. The cow is none other than Sarva, Panishadoga, all the Upanishads. They are the cow. Kisha, Kena, Kata, Munda, Kama, Dukya, all those Upanishads, they are the cow. Also the Upanishad word is Strelingam. Dakaranta Strelingaha Upanishad Shabdaha. Like Gita, the mother, who is the milkman? Dogdha, Gopalanandana. Again the choice of the name here, Krishna, instead of Vasudeva, Gopalanandana. Here Gopalanandana is the son of Gopala, the people who protected the cows. Gama, Pala, Ethim, iti Gopala, cow herd boy we can call him. So we know if the cow has to be milked, it cannot be done by everyone. Otherwise we will get maybe kick instead of milk. That means the man should know the cow and the trades, the approach. Similarly the Upanishad also cannot be approached by everyone. Because Upanishads are very intricate, they cannot be approached by everyone. If you straight away go as a first philosophy student to the first Upanishad, Disha Vasivapanishad, the first mantra, Purnamada, Purnamidham, Purnamada, Purnamada, Chethe, that mantra itself, that if you see the meaning, this is whole, this is Purnam, that is whole, that is Purnam. From this Purnam, from this whole, the whole came, other Purnam came. And if you remove from this Purnam, only the Purnam remains. That is what the Shloka says. Whether the Purnam, the whole remains or not, the person won't be remaining because it will confuse so much. So this is supposed to be the first Upanishad. Are you hearing me? Are you hearing me? Yes, mama, we can hear you clearly. And here, the Krishna, we should know how to approach the Upanishad also. And there are Mimamsas, Upakramad, Shedalingas, all those literatures are there, texts are there. That is why traditional learning becomes very important because we cannot just like that learn somewhere. And then think that we know. So it's a traditional learning state. Here, Krishna is the master cowherd who knows the essence of the Upanishads. Also, a calf is necessary since the cow will not yield the milk without the calf. If in India, you might have seen, they will get up a calf which is all filled with some hay and all that thing to mimic the calf so that the cow will give the milk thinking that it is calf. Keeping the calf as the ploy, then the milkman can milk. Here, the calf is Arjuna, Partha. So if Arjuna was not there, who had the problem of samsara and who said, Srisweshtiham Shadimam Tom Prapannam, we are going to read that Shloka. Then alone, Krishna could give. Similarly, the teacher, even if the teacher knows how to teach, he needs a student. Otherwise, it will be all solid like him. Monologues. Dukhdham Gita Amritam Mahathir. The milk is the great Gita Amritam, the nourishing diet. And this milk is not only consumed by the calf, not good for the calf if it consumes all the milk also, but also through it is taken in various forms, kaafirupenaya, tirupenaya, servathriya, it goes on everywhere. So all other people also get the benefit. Who are the people? Sudhi hi bhokta. Though Sudhi refers to noble people, those noble people who are eligible, they also enjoy along with Arjuna. So Upanishad is the cow. Krishna is the milkman and Gita, the milk and Arjuna, the calf. This is the imaginary and that imaginary is complete now. It is important to know that Gita has to be interpreted based on the Upanishads only and not independently. That is what Shankaralada says also. Every other time he relates to the original Upanishad mantra that makes Gita steady, very useful and beautiful teaching. Now let us go to the next shloka. Vasudevasutam devam kam sacchanuram ardanam devaki param anandam krishnam vande jagat guram So after worshipping Matar Gita and Veda Vyasadhyathar, Madhusudana Saraswati, he worships Lord Krishna, the teacher of Bhagavad Gita. In the last two shlokas, Krishna was worshipped as the milkman who milked the milk of Gita from the cow of Upanishads. Jagat gurum krishnam akham vande. I prostrate that Krishna who is the jagat guru, the teacher of the whole world. In what way? As a teacher of the Vedas which is considered to be Yishwaravachanam, that is the words of the Lord Himself through which we will get all this done. So it is universal teaching. Or if Krishna is taken as an avatar, who has given out Bhagavad Gita, through Bhagavad Gita he is teaching the entire universe. So he is again universal teacher. And what type of Krishna he is? Vasudevasutam, who is the son of Vasudeva, and who is Devaha, the greatest Lord, and later the exploits of Krishna as a child, they are given in the next line. Kamsa chanura mardana, who is the destroyer of Kamsa and chanura. This only indicates Dharmasamsthaapanartham Krishna. He has taken the avataram to establish Dharma. Kamsa, chanura, they all represent the embodiment of Adharma. Whether those people actually existed or not, we should know that it is their embodiment of Adharma. And the Lord destroys Adharma to establish Dharma. So Lord is the protector of the Gyanakanda, the Vedanta, and the Dharmasastra. So the Moksha Sastra and Dharmasastra is protected by Lord. Moksha Sastra is protected through the teaching of Vedanta. And Dharmasastra is protected by destroying Adharma and blessing Dharma. We are going to learn more of these things later when we go to the individual chapters. Paritranaya sadhunam, Vinasaaya saddushkirtam, Dharmasamsthaapanarthayam, Sambhavami, Yuga Yuga, Lord Himself says. So Devaki param ananda, one who is the highest ananda to Devaki. That is the Shloka, the Gathara. I prostrate, Sach Krishnan. Next Shloka. Bhishma dronathata jaya drata jala gandhara nilotpala Shalyag raghavati kripenavaghani karne navelakula Ashvatama vikarna goramakara duryodhana vartinim Sotirna kalupandavairanadi kai vartaka kesavaha Very beautiful Shloka, extremely very nice imagery. Here Krishna is prostrated as a guide, as a help for all samsaris. Here the Pandava family. In all kinds of situations, even though born as royal children, the Pandavas, even in the war also, they were in a disadvantageous position only all the time. The Kaurava army was very very big. Drona, the teacher, how to win him, who will always be superior and who knows the weakness of the student. So Drona is on their side. In addition to Drona, Bhishma is there, Karna is there, Ashvatama is there. All are big warriors. Even numerically they were stronger. In addition to strength, they were good in cheating and evil methods also. So the war situation is not at all in favor of the Pandava clan at all. However, what is that one factor which completely turned the table in favor of the Pandavas? The cause is due only to one factor, kai vartaka kesavaha. Mischief for mischief, strength for strength, wisdom for wisdom, all were deployed. Killing of each giant, Drona, Bhishma, Karna were all made possible only because of Lord Krishna. His unseen hand is there everywhere in every instance. Similarly, the author says that we also face very many problems in life. If we want to deal with them, kai vartaka kesavaha, go and prostrate to Lord Krishna. Kai vartaka means his boatman. Here Krishna is worshipped as the Bhakta Jnana Uddhara Kaha. The Bhakta Jnana Uddhara Kaha, the one who uplifts his Bhakta from their problems. Bhakta Jnana Uddhara Kaha. And a beautiful political sloka is given here. The Mahabharata is compared to a huge river. What river it is? The Vrindavanadhi, Rana means the war itself that is portrayed as a river. That is compared to a river. The Pandavas have to cross the river and reach the other shore of victory. But they could not have crossed because the terrible river was filled with lots of rocks, high current, deep whirlpools, crocodiles, sharks, all kinds of fierce things. And what is the whirlpool current? Shark and all that thing is said in this sloka as an imaginary. Bhishma drona theta. For the river, theta means the banks. The banks are Bhishma and dronacharya. And why they are compared to banks of the river? It's a metaphor actually. Because the banks control the direction of flow of water in the river. Similarly, the direction of the war is controlled, guided by Bhishma and drona. So Bhishma drona gave theta asya asya asya Bhishma drona theta. And what is the water? Jayatratha jala, a very powerful king. Jayatratha, he is responsible for killing Abhimanyu. And what are the powerful hiding rocks? Gandhara, Neela, Uthala. There are two readings. Neela means actually here black or dark. We can call it blue also. These are dark stones. Krishna, Neela, Megashyamada. The color is one is supposed to be dark, like cloud like. And Uthalam means stone. And there are two readings also. Neela, Uthalam, dark rock, powerful like dark rock, who the king of Gandhara kingdom. Or Neela, Uthalam means Uthalam is lily or a blue flower. That is the Gandhara king is described as a beautiful warrior. You can say beautiful warrior, handsome warrior, what do you say? Then Shalyagrahavati, Shalyagraha, the graham. Graham means like a shark or crocodile. For the river, the war river, Shadi shark is Shalyagraha, another powerful warrior. And what is the current? Kripeana vahani, Kripa is the high current. Kripa is the brother of Kripea, who is the wife of Dronacharya. So this Kripa is the high current. And who is the powerful wave? Karanena velaakula, Karana was like a powerful wave, who will appear from nowhere and make people disappear. Such a powerful warrior was Karana. And who are the crocodiles or other types of terrible fish? Ashwathama vikarna goramakara. They are the terrible, fearful fish in the river. And what is the world pool? Duryodhana avarthani, as the world pool can take everything down. So was Duryodhana destroying everyone. Avarthana is the world pool. So the Pandavas have to cross such a river, full of all these things. That means it is impossible to cross such a river. How did they then cross? They must have a special boat and a boatman, manoeuvring the boat. Krivartha kaha, Keshavaha. Krishna was the boatman. And therefore, sa rananadi uttirna. This powerful war river. Actually this is a beautiful alankaram called Rupa kalankaram in Sanskrit. So it's a metaphor. So was uttirna means they was crossed. This river was crossed because Lord Krishna was the boatman. And one story of Jai Darda itself is adequate. If you know the story of Jai Darda, Jai Darda and Mahabharata war, he killed Abhimanyu by cheating. Arjuna took a vow because of that, that by sunset I will kill Jai Darda. Arjuna should have just stopped with that vow alone. But as a Kshatriya, sometimes they go overboard. And he also made a prathiknya. If I don't kill him by sunset, what will I do? I will kill myself. This is not necessary at all. But he made that vow also to emphasize his inclination, his intent to kill Jai Darda before sunset. So the Duryodhana, all these people, they were very keen on protecting Jai Darda. By doing so, they achieved two things. One is a powerful warrior like Jai Darda is protected in their side. And number two, another powerful enemy, Arjuna will kill himself without any effort. They don't have to put any effort at all. He will commit suicide or he will self-immolate himself. Arjuna could not do anything. Sunset came, could not kill Jai Darda. So he put the fire to emulate himself. So Jai Darda came out with Duryodhana and all these people. Because there is no war after sunset. Those days, when the Sandhyamana time comes, when the sun sets, they want to perform Arasana Dhyamana, Karmasana Dhal, even in the war field. So at that time, war was called off. Suddenly the sun appeared. Did not set at all. The sun never set. But Krishna made a trick. When Duryodhana and Jai Darda appeared, Arjuna immediately killed Jai Darda. Sun was never set. Krishna just covered the sun with his chakra. So the idea is what? Krishna was behind everything to establish Dharma. So Kai Varta Kaha, Keshavaha. Next is Shloka. Satsang of the Lord Krishna Shloka Shloka Shloka Shloka Here again, the worship of Mahabharata itself. Previously worship of Mother Geetha was worshiped. Another beautiful metaphor. This is another Rupa Kalankaram here. Mahabharata is compared to a wonderful lotus. Bharata Pangajam. Pangajam means lotus. So Naha Shreyase Buyad. Let the Mahabharata Lotus blesses all for our well-being or moksha. Here well-being refers to moksha. This is the main prayer. All other lines are in the description of Mahabharata Lotus. Because Lotus has got many virtues and so does Mahabharata also. Lotus is generally born where? In a Saras, in a lake or a pond. So it is called Sarojam. Sarasi Jatam Sarojam. Born on lakes and ponds. And Mahabharata Lotus is born out of water. Parasariya Vachaha Evasaraha. Parasariya is Vyasaha. Sunna Parasara. Parasara is his father, Parasaram Hashi. So he is called Parasariya. So Parasariya is Apadhyam. Parasarasiya Apadhyam, Pumaan Parasariya. Vachaha means his words. So the words of Vyasacharya are the Saras, the pond or the lakes. Jamp means Jatam, born. Born out of the lake of Parasariya's words. Vyasacharya's words. And what that Lotus is? It is Amalam. The Lotus also is Amalam. It is Shuddham, pure. Same way, Mahabharata also is Amalam free from all impurities. And what is the impurity for literature? We say Mahabharata means literature. And what is the impurity in literature? There are two impurities. One is Shabdadosha. Another is Artha-dosa. When the meaning is not proper or is not in accordance with Dharmasastra, it is Artha-dosa. In the context, there is defect. Artha-dosa means there are defects in these considerations. Or Shabdadosha, the language, the grammar, they may be wrong. So Mahabharata is free from both types of doshas also. So Amalam or Doshah-rahitam as the Lotus. Also, the Lotus has a wonderful fragrance. And what is the fragrance in Mahabharata? Gita-artha-ganda-utkata. Gita-artha, Bhagavad Gita and its Tathparayam, the intent, the Vedantic teaching. Ganda means fragrance of that. Utkata means excessive, beautiful, very fragrant. That is rich with the fragrance of the Gita teaching. Mahabharata has Gita in it and it is rich with the fragrance of the Gita teaching. So in the Mahabharata, the fragrance part is Bhagavad Gita. The Nana-kyanaka-kesara. It has got the kesara. Kesara means in the Lotus flower, you would see this small fiber-like thing. The filaments of Lotus. For Mahabharata, the filaments are Nana-akyanaka. So akyan means stories. There are so many stories. So in the Mahabharata, there are a lot of stories. So each story is like a filament of the Lotus flower, adding beauty to the Mahabharata flower. And it is blooming with what? Kharikata sambodhana bodhita. Abhodita means expanded, bloomed into a wonderful flower through the stories of Lord Krishna. Each episode is the vibhuti, the glory of the Lord. Yasaacharya is not interested in writing the story of Pandavas and Kauravas. Wherever Dharma is there, there the Lord is there to protect. Dharma wherever is there, he is there to protect us and establish Dharma. So it is not Pandava katha or Kaurava katha or even Draupati katha, but Kharikatha. Kharikatha is the hero of the entire epic Mahabharata. And through the stories of Kharikatha, the Mahabharata has been expanded. Sambodhana means teaching. Through the teachings of Kharikatha, the Mahabharata has been expanded. Then lo ke sajjana shatpada hi aharaha pe peyamanam mudha. Any wonderful lotus or flower must be always by salt after by bees, because they can enjoy the honey. Similarly, the Mahabharata flower also should be salt after by some people who are those people. Sajjana shatpada hi, sajjana, all the noble people, darmikaha, compared to shatpada hi, there are the bees and all. The six-legged insects, shatpadani, ssajatpada. What has six feet? The insects, bees and all that. The flies, they all have six feet. So the beauty is, if you look at the lotus from a distance, its beauty will attract the eyes. And if you go near the lotus, not only the eyes, but also for nose, the pleasure comes because of the sweet fragrance. And if you still go closer, and if you can touch it, the pleasure to the skin, so soft touch of the flower. So as you approach, you can get varieties of types of ananda. But still, as we know, we cannot directly enjoy the taste of honey. You can enjoy all these pleasures, but you cannot enjoy the taste of honey since we don't have the instrument for that. The insects have. The bees can enjoy the essence, probose of the insect. That helps them to enjoy the honey. Similarly, the Mahabharata story, if looked superficially, can cater also. Even for gross-minded people, from a distance, it is beautiful just as a story of Rama and Mahabharata and all that. But the same epic, if approached a little bit closely with the sense of dharma, dharma and analysed, we find the story is only superficial. And what is really taught is dharma and adharma. Values of life, relationship between people, all those things. But when a person is very mature, very mature means sadhana-chattushtaya-sampanna-adhikari-naha. People who are all, yesterday I spoke about all these four fold qualifications, Vivekavaira, Gyan and all that. If a person is well qualified in all of them and he is an adhikari, he is like a bee. He can enjoy the honey also. The Vedantic wisdom is the honey. So Moksha sastra. Through the Bhagavad Gita teaching, through the Moksha dharma, all those things are taught. So the story part, dharma sastra part and Moksha sastra part, all are given in Mahabharata. So by the Sajjana-shatpada-ihi, by the Sajjana-beast, noble people, the beasts who are like the noble people, it is ahara-khaha, pepe-yamanam. It is drunk again and again. How? Mudha, happily. It is pepe-yamanam. Again and again it is drunk by Sajjana-shatpada-ihi, the noble people. And finally, kali-malam-radvamsi. The impurities of kali-yuga is kali-malam. It seems as the yuga goes, the people also become worse and worse. Compared to krta-yuga, satya-yuga, tretam, goparam and kali-yuga, there is gradual decadence of dharma. By the time kali-yuga comes, the people are considered to be worst. Word kali means literally quarrel. Everybody only quarrels. Throughout the world there is only quarrel. We are all seeing it also today here. So, kali-yuga means the yuga when people are always quarreling. So, if this polluted mind is to be purified in kali-yuga, varata-pangajam, the mahabarata flower, that is the pradvamsi, the destroyer of the kali-malam, the impurities of kali-yuga. Let the mahabarata be na-ha-shreyasa for our shreyas. Let that mahabarata be that. Glorifying mahabarata. Continuing. Here also Lord Krishna is prostrated. Madhavam aham vande. I prostrate that madhava. Mahadeep sabdasha, Mahasabdara first rule, mahalakshmi. And dhava means husband. Husband of mahalakshmi is Lord Vishnu. Whose nature is what? Parama anandaha. The embodiment of the highest ananda. Other two lines talk about the glory of that Krishna. Who is mukam karoti vachala? Who makes even a mukaha a dumb person? An eloquent speaker. Actually it's a talkative person, vachalam. But here we have to take it as eloquent speaker. Even a dumb person, he can make him eloquent speaker. Pangum langayate gireem. Who will make even a lame person? A gireem langayate. Cross the mountain. He can even make him cross the mountain. Yet kripa, by his blessing, his grace, that Krishna, Parama ananda, Madhava, I prostrate. So the idea is what? Previously Krishna was worshipped as Moksha Pradata, one who gives Moksha. Here he is worshipped as the one who fulfills even worldly desires. So bhukti mukti pradata pradata accham tasmay krishnaya namo namaha. So I worship, I prostrate to such a Krishna. So Parama ananda, Madhava, one day. Then the last Janashloka. This loka is also prostration to Lord Krishna. Tasmay devaya namaha. My namaskaram to that Deva Lord Krishna. And all that is the substance of this loka. And all other lines are all amplifying his glories. Enumerating that his glories. What type of Krishna he is? M. Brahma varuna indra rudra maruthahas tunvanti. Who is praise tunvanti by even Brahmaji, Chaturmuka Brahma, Varuna, Rudra, Maruthas, all those devatas. And he is the God of all gods, the highest, ultimate God, is Lord Krishna, Mahavishnu. So Brahma, Indra, they represent the presiding deities of a particular power only. Brahma is the Lord for the creative faculty. And Indra, he is the Lord of, he is the King of all the devatas. But creative power, partial powers, they are all Adhistanadevatas. Whereas Krishna is the presiding deity of all powers, the total devata. So all gods praise him through what? The Vahisthava Vahisthava. Through divine hymns. The Vahisthava Vahisthava hymns, Sukthas, Glorification, all of them. Tunvanti, they praise, they glorify. Not only that, Veda hi sanga padakramo panisadai hi gayanti. A little detail here. But in Vedas also, the Lord's glory alone is talked about. In Vedas also, Lord's glory is talked about. Not only Veda, sanga, the Vedas have six angas. These are all things which we have to remember. Because Veda Angas, Upangas, there are so many other literatures. They are all called Vidyasthanas. The Vedas, four Vedas, and six Vedas Angas, and four Upangas. All these things are called Vidyasthanas. They are about all knowledge. Four team Vidyasthanas. And the six Vedas Angas are Siksha. Siksha talks about the letters, each letter, and all the other things accompanying the quality of the letters. And Vyakaranam, the grammar. And Chandas, the Vedic meter, and Niruktha, the etymology of each one of the words that are deployed in the Vedic literature. And Jyotisha, astronomy, astrology, all those things also. And Kalpa, the procedural aspects of every one of the rituals and all that thing. All these things are described. They are called Sa Anga. Vedas along with all the Angas. And Padakrama Upanishad. So Padakrama, etc. They are all various types of chanting. Actually, those days, with the attitude to retain the Vedas in its own purity forever. In the absence of any written text or any type of any of those things. They were all only propagated from Guru to Sishya to Sishya to Sishya, like that it went on. So it was a Karanaparam para. So the Rishis, they devised various intricate methods to recite the same mantra in so many ways. So that the original mantra cannot be forgotten at all. So for example, this is in a Samhita part, if you take the original mantra, Veda mantra, Osadaya Samvadante Somaena Saharagyam, Sirk Samhita mantra it is. It has actually, Osadaya Samvadante Somaena Saharagyam. So all these words are there. This is the Padapada. This is called each Padam. Each one of these, this is Samhita. This is the original text. And people try to recite it, separating each Padam, each word. Osadaya Samvadante Somaena Saharagyam. So when I chanted it like this, these Swara also varies, intonation varies and also each word is put separately. Because when you combine them, there are rules of conjunction. All those things will come and they are combined, the Swaras also vary. So people should know how your particular sentence is composed by separating them into individual words and how the Swaras also vary when you separate them in that manner. And then this is the Padapada, simple. And then they did the Krama Pada where they combine word one and word two, word two and word three, word three and word four, so that the first, the Mula mantra can never be forgotten. For example here, Osadaya Samvadante Somaena Saharagyam, Raghetiragyaam. So A, B, B, C, C, D, E, F and it concluded F, E, F, E, F. So that indicates the conclusion of that particular thing. This is Krama Pada. And this is Padapada and Krama Pada. They are considered from the original mantra, whatever is the order in which the original mantra occurs with the various words, the order of the words is maintained in these two methods of chanting and that is called Prakriti, the natural order. But the Rishis were not content with that because with very complicated mantras one can derail very quickly. So they devised eight vikrithis, eight different vikrithis, means the artificial order, natural order, artificial order, where the words will go back and forth, that kind of thing. Jata, Mala, Sika, Reka, Dajo, Dandu, Ratho, Ganaha. So all these eight vikrithis, I don't have to go into too much detail. I will do only a Jata Pada and a Ganapada only for you to just only appreciate what is happening. So if the same mantra that I just now read, Osadaya Samvadante Somaena Saharagyam, just for this one mantra. Now Padapada and Ganapada, Krama Pada I just recited. Now if you recite it in Jata Pada, it will become like this. Osadaya Sam, Osadaya Sam, Samvadante, Vadante, Vadante, Somaena, Somaena, Vadante, Vadante, Somaena, Somaena, Somaena, Saharagya, Saharagya, Saharagya, Raghya, Raghya, Raghya. Now this one simple mantra, when you expand it into Jata in this format, it is like putting the braids on the ladies. You take one leg, put another leg and bring the previous leg again back. So this is how this is braided. This is called Jata. We use the word Jata also in the Vaisalang language also day to day. And this is Jata Pada. And between Jata Pada and Ganapada, there are another six vikrthis, Jata, Mala, Shikha, Rekha, Dvaita, Dandu, Ratah, all those things are there in between and then Ganapada. But in some Vedas, for example Krishna, Ajurveda and all, they go to Jata and then go to Ganapada only. There are Shukla Ajurveda and other Vedas. They have got other vikrthis also. There is a very big topic and I have actually taught in my Veda classes to people to give an exposure of what they are. But just to this one mantra, if you recite it in Ganapada, then this will be even much. Each word is repeated 13 times in a Ganapada. So the person should know the variation of the Swaras and if he cannot, if it is not recited properly, he cannot complete the mantra, the Shanti. This one mantra with just only so many small number of words will take this long to recite in Ganapada, repeating each one of those words so many times. And they did all that thing because in this way they will not forget the Mula mantra, the original mantra. If it is not done like that, then if the proper chanting is not made in Ganapada and all, one cannot complete the chanting because the rules of chanting is so rigid. So that is how they protected the mantras over ages in India because without any script, without any printing, without any other these things, teacher to student to tool like that was propagated. So not only Pada and Krama, but also through Upanishads also, even the Upanishads, they hail the Lord. So everywhere, even though they are not considered to be Bhakti, Grimthas or anything, but everywhere the gods, the Paramatma, the chaitanya, when we talk about God here, it is chaitanya and Brahman. So they all talk about them, they all sing the glory of that Lord alone, Gayanti. So Pada, Krama, all those things, the various types of chanting and the Upanishads, they all talk about Gayanti, they sing of the glory of the Lord. And M. Samagaha, even the Samavedans also do. Why M. Samavedans? Because all the Rig Veda Mantras only are said to tune in Samaveda. So even though Rig Veda would be separately doing that, but when they said to tune, there are so many variations in the Swaras and so many ways of chanting also. They are very, very pleasant to hear. So those Samagana also is done for glorifying the Lord. And that Lord alone, Yoginaha means here Gnana-Naha, the Gnani's. They see that Lord alone as their own in the Self. When a person becomes Gnani, for him there is no God separate from him. So he sees the chaitanya himself. So in what? Gnana-Avasthita, remaining in Gnana through Shravana, Manana, Nithityasana, through Gnana-Yoga. Shravana means Aham Brahman, I said and you heard. That is the knowledge that you got. And then you got doubt how I can be Brahman. I am a Harpa Gnaha, Alpa Shaktimaan, I am an ordinary mortal, I am such a, what ever is the height and weight, I am such a person, how can I be Lord? So that doubt will immediately come. So one has to go on doing Manana. Again and again try to analyze more and more, go on trying to exercise the brain to understand the real thought-prim of that, that is Manana. And even after Manana, there will be a lot of habitual tendencies. How I can be Lord? So a lot of habitual tendencies will be there for the person and that has to be done to internalize that knowledge. One has to do Nithityasana. Nithityasana through all this, through Gnana-Yoga. So Karma Yoga taught about all the Karma, Yagas, Gnasa and all that, but everything. And through Gnana-Yoga one has to go through these procedures, Dhyana, Dishra, Manana, Nithityasana, to internalize the teaching and to warn up your Brahmanhood. I am Brahman, I am Brahmachaitanya, Aham Brahmasmi, Tatvamasi, all those things for that to be internalized one has to do Nithityasana. So having absorbed their minds into themselves, they discover the Lord, not as some person outside, but as their antaratma, Yama Yoganaha, Paschanti, all those Gnani's, they see as their own antaratma. Yesyantam Navidhu Suragana, Devayatas Mahinamaha. So Yesyantam Surasura Gana, Navidhu. Surasura Gana, Navidhu whose limits are not known, even to Devas and Asuras. Yesyantam. Yesyantam whose limit is not known, Navidhu, even to the Suras and Asuras. Devayatas said, such a Lord, I do namaskaram to him. So here the story indication of what people is, Brahma and Vishnu wanted to go and find the head and the foot of the Lord. And Brahma took the form of a swan and he flew up and Lord Maharashtra took the form of Raghava and he went to the, dug into the boomy so much, but they could not reach because his bounds, his antam and adi cannot be with you. People cannot find that and who is all pervading, such a Lord, such a Brahman is all pervading. To that Lord, here the Krishna, I prostrate, Deva, I am, Dasma, Namaha. When we talk about Krishna here and all that, it is not that Krishna who steals butter and playing all these pranks, we are talking about Krishna here as Paramatma. With this, the Dhyana shlokas are over. Now we can go from here to the text, proper text of Bhagavad Gita. So the Bhagavad Gita, before I go into the proper text in the Shloka, Swas chapter, I will just make a brief mention about Bhagavad Gita. Bhagavad Gita has 700 shlokas divided into 18 chapters. And each chapter is called a particular yoga, indicating a particular topic or subject matter. For example, Karma yoga, Jnana yoga. So there are 18 topics or yogas are discussed. Each topic has got, each chapter has a name, it's a topic. And the first chapter consisting of 47 shlokas is called Arjuna Vishad Yoga. The first chapter is called Arjuna Vishad Yoga. It has 47 shlokas. So the subject matter of the first chapter is what? That is going to be Arjuna Sya Vishadha, the grief of Arjuna. When we want to study Bhagavad Gita, you start with a topic of grief of Arjuna. Now one can wonder, when we want to study Bhagavad Gita, Jnana, Karma etc., that's what our intent was. Who should, why should we know about the grief of Arjuna at all? No need at all. Why should I worry about somebody's grief? Arjuna's grief. What is the purpose? Remember, Gita or Rupa Nishad is primarily known as Moksha Shastra. It is called Brahma Vidya, knowledge of the Self. They are only secondary names, but the main name of the Shastra is Moksha Shastra. Moksha Shastra is a science meant for liberation, Moksha. Liberation from what? Freedom from sorrow, from all types of problems of life, anger, attachment, depression, slavery, sense of dissatisfaction. All put together can be called grief. Not being happy, very put in a brief in one word, not being happy, unhappy person, sorrowful person. So all these put together, we have a technical name, it is called Samsara. Samsara is all these put together. Not physical or external problems, but the psychological problems. Samsara refers to the psychological problems. Sorrow is the main representative, including that least, karma, krodha, lobha, mokha, madhama, all those things. So when we say Moksha Shastra, we mean that Shastra which will liberate a person from Samsara. So Samsara is Moksha Shastra, the one that can take a person out of Samsara. Really speaking, every human being through all his activities is trying to get out of Samsara knowingly or unknowingly. We may not know it, but that's what we are trying to do. It's an instinctive, fundamental, universal urge. Animals, plants, humans all struggle to get out of Samsara. But Samsara, sense of limitation. Even the search for reality becomes secondary because this struggle of Samsara is universal, but not the search for reality. Nobody says, we ask anybody else, searching for reality, he says, no, who is going to search for reality and all. I am having my own problem of paying mortgage and this and that. So go to a bus stand or train station, interview people. Do you want reality, fundamental, substratum of the world for him? It is water, ration, all those things. If you ask him whether he wants reality, he is going to say, these are my problems. These are real problems. Then why do we talk about reality or self-knowledge? According to our scriptures, self-knowledge happens to be a means of getting out of Samsara. To get out of Samsara, the means is self-knowledge. And self-knowledge by itself is not valuable to us. But if it is prescribed as a means to get out of problems, Brahmavit, Apunodhi Param, knowledge of the truth leads to innate happiness. Therefore, the primary goal is freedom from Samsara. And so Bhagavad Gita or the Upanishads, they should be viewed as moksha sastra. So when a person asks, what does Gita teach? Don't say that it teaches reality. Then no one will come to the class. But say it teaches how to get out of sorrow. Then everyone will come because everyone wants to go on a sorrow. Therefore, Gita is moksha sastra. Freedom from sorrow or samsara. And if I want to get out of Samsara, first what should I know? I should know first that I have this problem of Samsara. I have to accept that. Raga, Dvesha, Kama, Krodha, all that. Then I will consciously get out of this disease from an instinctive pursuit. So my fundamental problem should be known clearly. But most of us have what is known as the Samsara, the Smasana Vairagya. You know there are two types of Vairagya. Purana Vairagya means Mashaana Vairagya. This Mashaana Vairagya is what somebody let us say he dies. We feel then we have this problem. But it is just forgotten immediately. So it is all Ram, Nam, Satya, He goes up to the place they accremated and that's it. Afterwards, till that time they will be talking all Vedanta and all. Once it is done, that is all forgotten. So this problem of grief is always there. An intensive problem that one has to recognize first. And if this problem is not manifest all the time because of our distractions, we will never make a conscious effort at all like a person in worry going to movie. He laughs when there is a joke. The moment the joke is gone, he goes back to his Oryan grief. That means grief is there fundamentally all the time. Stahibawa has become grief. So this awareness of this grief is called Samsara Darshanam. So before Atma Darshanam, one should have Samsara Darshanam. And even after the Samsara Darshanam, like diagnosing the disease, they have to get rid of it. Like cancer. He may not go to the doctor to cure because it will cause pain and all that. So it is not adequate that you know that you have a problem but also a thivrayicha, a craving desire to get out of it. So if these two are not there, we cannot get out of it at all. So here Samsara disease is universal, common to all people but only very few people discover it as a serious problem. So in the first chapter, what we get is Arjuna, a representative of humanity. All of us are Arjunas. He didn't know also that he has the problem of Samsara. Never saw Moksha Sastra at all. But here in the Mahabharata Vah, we find Arjuna discovering the problem of the grief as a fundamental stahibawa. As I mentioned, in a stahibawa in a concert, the person who plays the Tambura, the stahi, maintains that. So even though so many Alankara Santral can be done by the musicians, he should always be based on the stahi. So any story will have one fundamental emotion. All the emotions will come and go. For example, for Ramayana, if you take the story of Ramayana, Shroka Rassam is the stahibawa. The entire Ramayana is full of Shokam. But in between, there may be some happy scenes also. For example, when Shurpanaka comes, everyone laughs in this movie. So even in a serious movie, there will be some jokes etc. here and there. But everyone knows that the whole movie is full of grief. So for all of us, what is the stahibawa? It's not at all fine. I am not happy. Then what about all other incidences? They come and go. I am not happy. But incidences come and go. I am momentarily happy. Similarly, the case of Arjuna also, only in the battle, he realizes the problem of Vishadha. Vishadha means grief. Arjuna-Vishadha Yoga. Not as an external problem, but as an internal problem. Generally, when we have grief, we attribute the cause of grief to something external. That is human nature. I am unhappy because my neighbor, office conditions, government, colleagues, same way we attribute Samsara 2 to external world. Our Samsara we attribute to external world. But here, in Bhagavad Gita, the discovery is, it is not a problem outside, but it is my own innate problem. And if I know that the problem is inside, then I will try to solve the problem inside. If not, I will keep on trying to solve the problem from outside. Here in the first chapter, Arjuna is to discover that the problem is within himself and not with the world. And to discover like this, I require a particular situation in life. Once such a situation comes, generally what people will do? They come to Gita class. The situation turning the direction of life, business and all that. For Arjuna, the situation happens to be the Mahabharata battlefield itself. So the essence of the first chapter is what? Samsara Darshanam by Arjuna. From that, what we should understand is, we also can pursue Gita only when we understand the Samsara problem clearly. Then only we will seek the solution also seriously. That is, as a Mumukshu alone, I can pursue Gita-Bhagavad Gita properly. That is why in Sadhana Chaturthi's Sampath, we have included Mumukshutva, Vivekam, Vairagyam, Shamaadshakasampathi and Mumukshutva. The craving desire to get Moksha. So both the cause and the effect of grief are studied in this chapter. Vishad asya hetu and Vishad asya karyana. Vishad asya sorupa. Ketu sorupa karyana. Only then the understanding will become clear. To understand anything, we should understand all the three clearly. The nature, the cause and the effect. What is the hetu, the cause of Vishadha? Krishna gives the cause is always Raga. The attachment. Raga means attachment. This attachment alone leads to grief. And the attachment was what? Always towards an object which gives me comfort, which gives me security, which gives me happiness. I have attachment towards that. So Raga is ishta vishaya Raga. Towards a desirable object. And if I should have Raga, it shows what? That I depend on something as a source of joy. That means without that source of joy, I am unhappy. That means Raga comes because I am not happy with myself. I am not satisfied with myself. So I depend on an external object for happiness. And then you take a stick for example for walking. You lean on a support like that. So I will have attachment to that stick. Since without that I will fall. So when the source of joy is gone, joy is gone, I will be unhappy. So unhappiness comes. First I am not happy with myself. I am a weak person, mentally not secure with myself. And what is the next thing? Because I am not strong, I want to lean on people, things, possessions, circumstances. And when they are gone, it will lead to grief. Therefore weakness Raga, the attachment, vishadha, the grief. So Raga is the cause of Shoka grief. And what is the effect of grief? When the person is depressed in mind, his buddhi is not going to work properly. The intellect is blunted. Thinking becomes clouded. Will scold anyone, beat people even. Then he will repent also. So grief always creates confusion or moha. Clouding of the intellect. So his actions will become negative actions. What is right will be considered wrong and vice versa. So these three things put together Raga, Shoka and moha is called samsara. So in the first chapter, in this battlefield, Arjuna is going to discover all these three problems. Raga, Shoka and moha. Moha is the solution. And the problem is not a simple one. It is very intense and he will try to solve a simple ka for example we will always try to manage. When the time comes, when the ka is there all the time, then we will take rest and medicine, go to doctor. So also Arjuna's struggle struggles in the first chapter to get out of samsara. So we get two points in the first chapter, the discovery of samsara and the struggle to get out of it. This is only the essence but the war gives the situation that triggers the discovery of this problem. With this background, let us enter into these shokas from next class. Thank you.