So I go to the next chapter, the first chapter. In the last class, there was one error in the way I said for the last shloka, for that sentence, I said that for the padha part they get twice the palam as the samita part when they recite. And for Krama part 4 times, those two are right. But when I said for the jata part, I made, I said 8 times, that was wrong because I didn't have the shloka with me that I forgot. The shloka is this. Samita part is this. So padhe twice the banakar, that is correct. And Krama, Krama part, it will be 4 times. But Varna Krama, Varna Krama, it is shataguna, 10 times. And sorry, 100 times. And jata yantum, if a person is a jata vallabha, the one who knows, a jata vallabha is a person who knows the entire jata padam by heart. For that person, sahasrakam, his palam is 1000 times. And when it comes to Gana party, for him it is, whatever I said, Savai Brahma, Savai Vishnu, Savai Rudra, Naysam Syaha. Gana party is considered the embodiment of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva themselves. So that is the correction that I wanted to just tell you before we go to the first chapter of Bhagavad Gita. In the same shloka, in the second last sentence, patienti yam yoginon varma yoginahan varma. Yoginahan, when you split it, you say yoginah. Yoginon is then you will split it as is. Okay. Now we will see the first chapter. So now let us see the context. Context is dhridharashtra, the parent of Kauravas, being blind, is not able to know what is happening in the battlefield. Very anxious to know what is happening to them. In the Vyasacharya, he gives a special power to Sanjaya of being able to see what is happening in the battlefield, remaining in the palace by the side of dhridharashtra, like a CCTV or whatever it is you can call. There is no real screen though. But there is another unique thing is Sanjaya can mentally see through Divya Chakshu, not only he can see, he can feel the feelings of the characters. That is unique. He can see, but to feel what the characters feel, that is unique. That shakti also Lord Krishna gave to Sanjaya. So now Sanjaya is narrating to dhridharashtra. And dhridharashtra asks questions to Sanjaya. He is asking what happened? Dhridharashtra watches. Dhridharashtra asks the question, Mama Kaha Pandavas Chaiva Kim Akurvathaya. What did my people, Mama Kaha, Mama Putraha, Kaurava, my children and the Pandavas do? Where Kurukshetra, Dharma Kshetra, Kurukshetra, in the field of Kurukshetra. And what they call Kurukshetra, Dharma Kshetra, it is a field of Dharma. Dharma only wins at the end in that place. And what did they do? He asked, when after Samavetha, after coming, assembling, arraying together in the battlefield, the Pandavas and the Kauravas, what did they do? With what attitude? Not for shaking hands or anything, they came together across. Youth Savahas, with a desire to fight each other and settle the account, whatever the account, they want to settle there. So with the desire of engaging in battle, what did my people and Pandavas children do in the battlefield? That is the question Dhridharashtra asks Sanjaya. So with the question itself, we can understand the mind of Dhridharashtra. He is not able to look at Pandavas as his people, my people and Pandavas. After all, Pandu is his own brother and his children are like his own. But instead of calling them also as my people, he creates a division. Dhridharashtra creates a division. We can see how Samsara comes. Every sentence, every aspect in Bhagavad Gita, we should look through Vedanta. That is what I told you in the beginning itself. Everything, the problem is whenever there is division, not just physical division of country, town or property, any of those. But also his own brother's children, he sees them differently. And again what? Raga and Dvesha are created. Raga, as I told you, is attachment. Dvesha is hatred. And now Raga to his own children, Mamaka and Dvesha to Pandavas children. And why this happens? It also is indicated as him being a blind king. He is blind. He is portrayed as blind because he is a Gnani. Blindness. Whether physically blind or not, we do not know. That may be true also. But what it indicates is he is blinded by his attachment, by his ignorance. And because of his ignorance, what comes is all this division. All the children also are born to the blind king. They are Duryodhanas, Dushrashanas, Durmuki, all kinds of children. They are also bad. Dur, the first prefix is they all talks about bad characters. Similarly, when there is ignorance in the intellect, whatever thought comes will be also Dutta vrittayaha. Vrittayaha means thoughts. They will also be bad thoughts. Raga, Dvesha, all alone. They alone will come. And how many? Not five or six, but hundreds of negative thoughts come if the intellect is blinded. Whereas for Pandu's children, Pandu represents white color or Satva Guna. Clear knowledge is there. So his children, the children of Gnanam, will always be Dharmikaha. So they will be Dutta vrittayaha here, Dharmikaha. And Pandu symbolizes a bright intellect and the children are Dharmaputra etc. They are all people of noble thoughts. That is also important. So Dhrirashrara represents blind intellect and Duryodhanas represents all negative thoughts. All the Duryodhanas, all the Dhartharashra, all his children and all of them. That is how the blind king asks, Mama kaha, Pandava aschayivam, kim akurvata, o sanjaya. That is the question. Let us read the second sloka. Sanjaya vacha, drishtva tu pandava nikam, dhyodham duryodhanasthada, acharya mupa sangam ya, raja vachanam abhravit. Sanjaya vacha, so Sanjaya said, Sanjaya said. Attention is now turned towards who? Duryodhana. Attention builds up. The war field. It is like a super bow. Duryodhana is looking at the army of Pandavas. Duryodhana, Pandava, Anikam, Drishtva. Pandava, Anikam, Drishtva. Drishtva means the Anikam refers to Ani. Looking at the army of the Pandavas, he surveyed the army of Pandavas. Which is Vyudham, arranged in a beautiful manner. It is a particular technique actually. Padma Vyuham, Garuda Vyuham. These are all the various arrangements of the armies so that the other opponent cannot easily penetrate and go through. So when a person enters into it, he will be mostly closed. For example, when a bee enters into a lotus flower, trying to shake the honey, the lotus will close. So the honey will be trapped inside. So arrangements are according to the Yudhasastra. They are all very important. Seeing that Drishtva, Raja Duryodhana, Vachanam Abraved, Duryodhana said these words to whom? Acharyam Upasangamya. After approaching, his teacher Acharya. And what teacher? Not Brahma Vidya Guru. But Dhanushastra Guru. He is the one who taught him Dhanur Vidya, Drona Acharya. So he approached Drona Acharya and asked him. So he approached him and uttered these words, expressing his feelings at the time of the war. The war is going to just start. Here we get the thoughts of Duryodhana also. So Vyasa Acharya is indirectly revealing what type of mind Dhritrashtra has got. He has got Mamakaha, Pandavaha and Raghavadvesha problem he has. And at least, is Duryodhana good? Okay, can be. He is anyway Dhritrashtrasana. His thoughts are also all negative, given in the following shlokas. Shloka 3. Pashya Itta Ampandu Putranam Acharyam Agati Imchamum Yudham Drupada Putrena Tavasishena Dheematha These lokas are to be in inverted commas actually, as addressed by Duryodhana, or Duryodhana Vachai should be. He is addressing Drona Acharya. Very interestingly here he says, Panduputrana Acharya. Instead of addressing Drona Acharya as my Guru, he is addressing him as Panduputra's teacher. Because he always has a feeling that Drona Acharya is always only physically here, but he really supports the Pandavas only. Because if my mind is a cheating mind, I will look upon everyone in the same way, generally as I am, so I think of everyone. So is Duryodhana. So same way good people also suffer. They think everybody will be like them. And many may be even really croaks. Even good people also suffer because everybody will be like them. So he addresses him as Panduputrana Acharya. What should I do? Ittaam Makhateem Chamum Pashya. See this vast army of Pandavas. Chamu means army. Makhateem is big vast. And this army is arranged by whom? Vyudham Drupadaputrana by the son of Drupadha. Drupadha is a king and is the father of Draupati also. His son Draupati's brother Dhrittadyumna. He is the commander in chief who has arranged this army of the Pandavas. And why does he say Drupadaputra and not Dhrittadyumna? He could have just said Dhrittadyumna. There also Drupadha and Drona have a long standing enmity. So if you tell the name of the enemy, his blood pressure will go up. Whose Drona Acharya's blood pressure will go up? So he wants Drona Acharya to get angry with the Pandavas. And what is the story? Drupadha and Drona Acharya were friends actually. They learned together. I mean Drupadha became a king. Drona Acharya, the Brahmin, went to Drupadha for some help. Like Kuchela and Krishna, let us say. But the kind Drupadha behaved as though he never knew Drona. He is otherwise a kind king. So this king, he behaved as though he never knew Drona. Generally this happens. Who are you? Due to arrogance and he ginsels Drona Acharya. Drona Acharya thought of teaching a lesson to him. So he invites him for a war, defeats him because he had the assistance of all the Pandavas. Ties him and in front of all the people, he is letting you. Now I will let you go. He said in front of all of the Dhrittadyumna killing him. He was captured but said, I am going to release you. And will also give you half the kingdom that I took away from you, half of the kingdom. So Drupadha gets extremely insulted by Drona Acharya. For a warrior, if he is caught, he would rather prefer to die than being excused by the enemy. And then given a favor also like half the kingdom. I will take it as if it is an arm. He is just giving him a picture and vows to kill him somehow. But he cannot do directly because to kill Drona Acharya is a big thing. So when Laukika always won't war, he looks at other ways. He performs a sacrifice to get a son to kill Drona Acharya. He could not directly kill. So he did a yajna to get a son to kill Drona Acharya. What a great Yaga he did. And out of that Yaga was born Dhrittadyumna. And still words is, this Dhrittadyumna wants to learn archery to kill whom Drona Acharya? He wants to learn archery to kill Drona Acharya and to whom he goes to learn to Drona Acharya himself. He goes to the same Drona Acharya to learn archery to kill Drona Acharya himself. But what is the rule in dharmic teaching? When a sincere student comes and asks for knowledge and if you know it, you cannot refuse it. You have to give him. So Drona Acharya knowing fully well the entire thing agrees to teach him and sincerely teaches him also. So these are all the elements of dharmic values we have to infer when we read Mahabharata and Gita. And that very Dhrittadyumna is there in the very friend. He is the army chief. So ultimately he alone kills Drona Acharya in the battle also. So Drona Acharya has got this particular feeling against them and therefore Duryodhana wants to invoke this animosity, that feeling of enmity he wants to create. That is why he says Drupada Putreana. And also who is he? Tava Sisyana. He is also your own student. He is against you. He is going to kill you. And what type of Sisyana? Dheematha, a cunning Sisyana to learn archery from you to kill you yourself. How can he? He should have been. Such an army is standing in front. Better you be with me and you kill them. So even though you may have your kind heart towards the Pandavas, you be with me and you kill them. He is telling Drona Acharya, Vyudham Drupada Putreana Tava Sisyana Dheematha. The name of Dhrittadyumna is not given. That we have to supply. Dhrittadyumna is given. So Dhrittadyumna, who is Drupada's son and your student and who is cunning, the army has been arranged by that person. These are all descriptive slowcastes. That's why I am just going. Atrasu, Ramahesh, Vasa, Bhima, Arjuna, Samayudhi, Yudha, Ano, Virat, Ascham, Drupada, Ascham, Harataham. So in this slowcast, Duryodhana is enumerating the important warriors of the Pandava army to Drona Acharya. Later he will enumerate those of the Kaurava army also so that we will have a comparative idea of who are the leaders in each of these armies. So again, continuation of Duryodhana Vacha addressing Drona Acharya. Atra means Atra Pandavasraini in the army of the Pandavas. There are Maheshwasaha. There are great archers. Ishwasa means bow. Maheshwasa means carrying great bow, archers. There are many great archers in that army. Shuraha, they are all powerful, valourous people. Who are those people? Bhima, Arjuna, Samayudhi, Bhima and Arjuna are all of them in battle. Maheshwasaha, in Sanskrit, every word is actually derived. Ishvara means arrow. Asaha means asanam, where an arrow is seated. That is the bow. So Ishvara means asanam, where an arrow is seated. And who are these people? He is naming them. Yuyudhana, Virata is the king, Drupada is the king, the king of Drupada, Drupati's father, and each of them are all Maharatas. Maharatas are like titles. Maharatas are the titles, the standard of warrior. For example, Virchakra, Paramagir Chakra and all that in Indian army. So here also Maharatas are the titles. There were Rathi, Maharaty, Adhirathi, Ardharathi, all those things are also there in the war fact. Maharatas means who can fight 10,000 enemies single-handedly. One person can deal with 10,000 enemies. He is also a Shastra Prevena, Maharatya Yudhisthvara. He must be single-handed. That is the Shagashra and Dhanvi Naam. He should be able to fight 10,000 enemies. Shastra Prevena, who is expert in the science of warfare, such a person is called a Maharatah. Actually, Bhisma, when he arranged the army, he gave the position of Ardharathi only to Karna. So Karna got very upset and said, I won't fight. Because he wanted to insult him or he wanted to put him down. He didn't want him to come up. So he is a Maharatu, but he made him Ardharathi. That is all. Some other things. I will win that time. So, this are all again names of the great fighters. So, Virayavan, the powerful one, Kashi Raja, objective for Kashi Raja. Purjit Kuntibhojaha, Shaibhya. They are also other fighters. Narapungavaha. They are not just names, but they are all great men. But Amangmen, Pungavaha means like a bull. Strong bull among many men. Just as a bull is so powerful, Shaibhya also is so powerful. And Yudhamanyahu and Uttamoja. They are again names also. What types of people they are? Vikrantaha, Yudhamanyahu is a very courageous person. And Uttamoja is the name of Drupata also. Who is Virayavan? Very powerful. Then, Saubhadra. Saubhadra is Subhadra's son, Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra. And Draupadeya, the five sons of Draupadeva from all the five Pandavas. All these people are all, Sarveyeva Maharataha. They are all Maharatis. Each one is a great optional warrior. Sronka 7, Asma Kam Tuvisishthaya, Thanibhoda Jvidyottama, Nayaka Amamasaim, Sanyatam Thanbra Vimite. After enumerating the important people, various of the Pandava army, now he is enumerating his army also. So that Dronacharya can have a comparison. Asma Kam, Ye Visishthaha, in our army Asma Kam, whoever is special, Visishthaha, Thanibhoda. You know them. Because you are leading this. You should know. Dijyottama means addressing the greatest Brahmin. Dijyaha is Brahmin. And Dijyottama is the greatest Brahmin. He says to Dronacharya. Where he is telling that he is a great Brahmin in the battlefield. When he is about to fight a war, he is addressing him as Dijyottama. You should know what to address when. Instead of saying him, Shura, all these great, great adjectives he gave to the other people, he is calling him a great Brahmin. Because Brahmin's work is not to fight. Chhatriya's work is to fight. So not for a Brahmin to fight. Mama Sainese Naayaka, who are the great leaders of our army. Who are Visishthaha, should be taken with Naayaka. Visishthaha Naayaka, the great leaders of our army. Asma Kam, Sainese Cham, Visishthaha, Naayaka, Thanibhoda. May you know them. Who are those great warriors in our army. And why am I enumerating them? I know that you belong to our party and you must be knowing that these are all teasing him. Dronacharya is a great scholar. He knows all these things. He taught them Dhanur Vidya everything. He knows warfare. But he is teasing him. When we are making a comparison for the sake of naming, I am telling this. Because he is comparing with Pandavasar. So he should name his own also. Vanyartham Tante, Arthubhyam Bravimi. For the sake of naming, I am telling this to you. Now he is going to enumerate the important people of the Kaurava army. While listening to the Kaurava army, Duryodhana does not intelligent. He does one intelligent thing at least. The first great one among the Kauravas is whom? He says yourself Bhavan. Dronacharya, like you, you are going to support me. So Bhavan. Then he talks about Bhisma, Karna, Kripacharya. And then Samitin Jayaha. Samitin Jayaha is not a name. But it is a person who is ever victorious. Samitin Jayah thing. One who never knows defeat at all. Jishnu. For Vishnu, Jishnu, Jishnu, Mahavishnu. This Jishnu means a habitual winner. He never knows defeat at all. He is habitual winner. So like this person is Samitin Jayaha, ever victorious. And then Ashwathama and Vikarna. That is Kripacharya, Samitin Jayaha. And Ashwathama and Vikarna. Kripacharya is the brother-in-law of Dronacharya. Dronacharya's wife Kripi is the sister of Kripacharya. And each name has got a meaning also. Ashwathama, one who is strong like a horse. Ashwai was Thama. Yes, Ashwathama. Horse power, he is so great for it. A big engine. Similarly, Bhishma is Bhayankaraha. Very terrible. So each name has a meaning. We don't have to go into the details of the name. At least just to say no. And Vikarna means another warrior. Then Samadattih means another warrior also. These are all names of the warriors. All these people are the great warriors of our army, the Kauravas army. Floca 9. Anyeche bhagavashura. I read both of them together. Anyeche bhagavashura. There are many Maharatis in my army also. But they are so many. I don't want to list them. Actually because they are so many. Drona knows them also already. So he generally says, Sanyatam Than Bravimi. There are many other powerful people who are motherthe tchaktha jivithaha. At least he has that much gratitude. Who have given their lives for my sake. Duryodhana says this to Drona. They have given their lives for my sake to support me. Not only that, each one is great in different fields. Nāna shastra praharanaha. They wield shastras and praharanams. Because weapons are also of two types. Shastra means those weapons which are kept in the hand and used like a sword, mace and all that. So you keep them in the hand and use them like sword or mace and all that thing. But astram or praharananis, they are like missiles. They are used to shot to hit a target. And also with mantra putham. They are also with the mantras. Besides the mantras, then you can make that arrow to be like whatever it is. You can rain, you can spit fire, you can do so many things. Sarve yuddha vishāradhā. It is not enough that they wield the weapon. They should know how to use it also. They are all well trained, great, experienced in warfare. Vishāradhā. Vishāradhā means nipunā, samartha, in fighting. With this the comparative study of both armies by Duryodhana is over. Now Duryodhana gives his verdict. Which army is superior in the next shloka? Look at that. He is starting the war. How he is starting? To tell which army is superior. Shloka 10. Apariyāptam tadhas mākam, bālam bīṣmā bhi raksitam, pariyāptam vidhame tesām, bālam bhi mābhi raksitam. Really speaking, Duryodhana's army is far, far superior to Pandavasar. Very big army. Bīṣma, Dhruvana, Karana, Kripa, Aswathama. They are just adequate. They are all so great warriors. Numerically also they are very strong, very big. And they have large army including Krishna's army. They have Krishna's army also with them. Krishna's offer himself to one side and he offers to give the army to the other side. So anyone will conclude that Kauravas army is superior. Because here we see actually Duryodhana concluding differently. Actually that story was when both Duryodhana and Arjuna they want to go to Krishna to seek his help in the war. So when they went there Krishna was sleeping. And you cannot wake up a sleeping person. He is a Sagesana Dharma. So Duryodhana came. He first came and he sat by the side of Krishna near his head. And then Arjuna came and Arjuna he went straight to Krishna's leg side and stood by the leg side. And Krishna woke up after some time and as he woke up he saw whom? He saw Arjuna only first. Because Duryodhana was on the side near the head. He went straight because Arjuna was at his feet. He is looking at him first. So he asked Arjuna what brought you here. Then Duryodhana's interview said, I only came first. So you should ask me first. Then Krishna said okay. First I will ask you what do you want? He said I want your entire army to be on my side when we fight the war. I want the entire Krishna Sabha. Krishna said okay. And he told Arjuna what do you want? I don't want anything else. I want only you. You are one person. I want you only to be with us. And Krishna said okay to him also. Because Duryodhana's this is his foolishness. He doesn't understand Krishna who is Krishna. So he thought Krishna as a person and he asked for all his army thinking that it will be big for him to win. Arjuna knew what type of person is Krishna. So when the Devam factor is there regardless of how big an army or whatever other things you may have without the Devam factor all your prithinams will only go based. Arjuna knew very well. So that is why he asked for that. So he says asmakkam balam aparyaptam. Duryodhana says asmakkam balam aparyaptam. Our army is not powerful enough. Aparyaptam not sufficient. Even though Bhishma is the rekshitham even though headed by Bhishma who is not defeated even by Parasurama. When they fought Parasurama and Bhishma in other situations they fought. But Parasurama started the fight and congratulated Bhishma. You are a great warrior. He told him such a great Bhishma to protect even then not sufficient. Whereas Ateesam idam balam this army of the Pandavas which is Bhima rekshitham headed by Bhima for them is pariyaptam is capable of is sufficient to win the war. So the idea conveyed is what? Even though Duryodhana has all these material things so much of army and all those things he lacks one thing namely the spiritual point the Devam factor. The unseen mysterious factor adrishta palam adrishtam which is what is seen adrishta means what is not seen which is represented by Lord Krishna. Krishna's army represents all the material wealth. If a person does not have the Devam factor the Lord the Dharma regardless of any amount of material things a person may have there will not be any sense of security whatsoever. Also incompleteness sense of dissatisfaction they all cannot be avoided for them if a person is purely mythic mystic one and that is what Duryodhana is suffering from. Whereas Arjuna because of the simple presence of Krishna even if he has to fight the army of entire army of the Kauravas all by one himself he would have still come out victorious because of this one factor the Devam factor Krishna factor. Therefore in life also however much we may have if the faith in God is not there always the fear of failure fear of insecurity self-difference anxiety they all will be there they cannot be avoided. But when there is this support in Tamil we say vellum mailum tunay. So yamirikabhaya main all those things in Tamil we say so samyayi sharanam ayyappa all those things this is the ayyappa mandala season. So we have that that about that Lord who is there to take us across when there is this security the shelter sharanam of the Lord which is not a seen factor it is an other term or material factor but an unseen mysterious factor. You will find that we can undertake anything and succeed also as in the Janashlaka. So Tirna kalupandavai rananidhi kaivarthakha keshavaha even the most difficult war situation was crossed over only because of that unseen factor that is the Devam factor. Duryodhana is lacking that Devam and Krishna is in the opposite side. He has all other things army etc. Duryodhana he is the king also the advantage of a ruling party is logistically is with him because Duryodhana is a ruler. Devam is missing because Dharma is missing wherever there is Dharma Devam will be there when Dharma is not there. Devam will not be there so when Dharma is not there there is no Bhagavan nor the presence of mind not the peace of mind any of those things won't be there. That is why Duryodhana thinks that he is not having sufficient enough army. But because of ambition he started the war somehow he wants to become victorious that is true he started the war but he did not realize that whatever he has however much he may have he will still feel that he is insufficient only. Let us go to 11th shloka Ayaneshucha Sarveshu, Yathabhagamavastitaha, Bhisma Mebhabhi Raksantum, Bhavanta Sarvayevahim Duryodhana gives instruction to all the people now including Grona Charya. Ayaneshucha Sarveshuavastitaha take your positions. Ayanam means strategic important position. The point in the football games everywhere this strategy is very important the position. The army has to be arranged in a particular fashion with several centers with gates, nodal points, platoons all that thing. Vyasacharya's knowledge of all that the coordination all those things are so so nice to see how Vyasacharya is able to bring out all those things so nicely. How Yathabhagam has been allotted by the commander before they came into the field the commander allotted so many positions you be here you be there you be whatever it is the leader. Then special attention should be given to whom all of you Bhisma Mevhabhi Raksantum, Bhisma being the head may you protect Bhisma Charya all your attention should be on him even though we are given so many other jobs. But your attention all the time should be on Bhisma. Sarveya Vahi all of you that is all of you should remain in your own position at the same time have an eye on Bhisma also. Up to this is Duryodhana Vachya starting from Shloka 3 to Shloka level. Let us go to Shloka 12. Now once Sanjay Vachya we have to change the screen. Bhisma says Duryodhana getting tensed up he sees him because he is already he is restless. So to encourage him and to begin the war he makes a loud noise. Kuru Vrindaha Pitamaha Kharsham Sanjana Enna. He wants to cheer up Duryodhana the great grandfather the oldest of the Kuru Reys Kuru Vrindaha he enthused he cheered up. Like these are like examination here like Duryodhana's fear and how did he do that? He has the situation here everything is tensed up so starting the war he is marked by blowing the conch like drums and all the conch. And what did he do? Simhanatham Vinadya Uchchai He having made a big roar like that of a lion loudly he made Simhanatham with his conch. Then Shankam Dattamau blew the conch gave the green signal for the war to start. So everything is ready for the war to begin. So having been accepted as superior by both sides. So Bhisma can start the war because he is superior in from both sides also for the Pandavas also and the Kauravas also. Prathapavana refers to Bhisma the powerful Bhisma he blew the conch. All others were waiting also they were always waiting for this particular moment when the start signal will come. Then they can start to blow each other blow their own conch. Each one has their own conch they blow that also each later. Tata Shankar Chabberiya Chhaam Panavana Kha Gomukaam Sagaisevabhya Han Yantam Shashadastumun Lobavatam Then what happened? Both sides of warriors have different instruments like Shankar. Shankar is conscious very hot type of drum they all have different instruments. Panavana Kha Gomukaam blowing and beating instruments all of them some of them are blowing instruments some of them are beating instruments like drums. So Sagaisevabhya Han Yantam they were all sounded immediately after Bhisma blew his conch by both armies. Imagine that condition so many people blowing all their big big instruments so simultaneously thousands of people making that loud noise. What will be the condition? Sa Shabda Haam Tumul Haam Abavate It became a very huge noise reverberating over the entire area. All dramatic picturization. If Vyasa chooses he can do both no philosophy here. No Advaita no Brahmasutha none of those. He is now just describing the war scene. He is just showing what is the situation and what is going to be the situation also. A noisy situation where no one will even imagine Bhagavad Gita which is a very subtle science. Bhagavad Gita gives all the dharmic things very subtle and he is giving in such a situation. How that Gita going to come? That development is going to be brought now. Tata Shwaya Tayi Raya Yuppe Haim Mahate Syaan Dane Sthitao Madhava Pandavas Chaiva Vyashankav Pradhatmatu Now the conch and other instruments are all sounded by the Kaurava army. Similarly Pandava army also were not behind they were also doing the same thing. First Vyasa Charya is mentioning Krishna and Arjuna because these are the focal points so he has to bring them. Even though Bhima is the head, Yudhishthira is the eldest. Why? Because he wants people to know these two people Krishna and Arjuna. So they are going to be the heroes of Srimad Bhagavad Gita. So he is bringing them to attention. That is why he describes their conscious, their horses etc. clearly focused in the first. Madhava Pandava Madhava is Krishna and here Arjuna Pandava here is Arjuna. Even Pandava are first all of them but here it is Arjuna. Where were they? Mahate Syaan Dane Sthitao Who were seated in a very big chariot, Syaan Dane. Not only that, what type of chariot it is? Shweta Hai Hai Hai Yuppe Details of even the horses drawn by white horses, majestic horses and what did they do? Divya Shankav Pradhatmatu They blew their conscious. And what type of conscious? Divya Shankav, divine conscious. So Vyasa wants our attention to be focused in the whole of this area. So like a close-up in the camera. So it gives lots of objectives so we can note these two people, Arjuna and Krishna in the battlefield. And who else? Other details are also given in the next Shloka. Pancas janyam Hrishikeshaham Devadattam Dhananjaya Poundram Dadmo Mahashankam Bhimakarma Vrkodara The names of their conscious are also given here. Hrishikeshaham Pancas janyam Dadma Hrishikeshahara first all are Krishna. He blew his conscious, Pancas janyam. Name of his conscious is Pancas janyam. Dhananjaya Arjuna, Dhanam Jagethi. It is Dhananjaya. One who brings plenty of wealth. Krishna is called Hrishikeshaham. Hrishikeshaham means all the instruments. Here instruments refer to the sense organs, the tenendriyas, all those things. And Teshami ishaham, the ruler of all the sense organs. The chaitanya-tyartha-ha here. So the consciousness behind all the organs, all the dhyanendriyas, karmendriyas, antanendriyas, behind all of them. Poundram Dadma Mahashankam Bhima Karma Vrkodraha Bhima Karma means the name of Bhima. Frightening. Bhibhiti Asmatu iti Bhima. A person of terrific karmas. He doesn't lift this football and volleyball. He lifts mountains. Such a guy he is. Never does ordinary things. He plugs trees, plays with big, big rocks, all kinds of things he does. So Bhima Karma. Bhimaani Karmaani Esesahar. Bhima Karma. So another name of Bhima is Bhikodraha, a great eater. He has blood done. He sees with a small stomach because he is like a wolf. Bhikodraha means a wolf. A stomach which you cannot even see. So much as part of the body. It won't be visible at all. Bhikasiya Udramiva Udrami Esesahar. So wolf stomach. A great eater and a great actioner. A person who is engaged in big, big actions. And what did he do? Mahashankam Poundram. His conch should also be special. So it is Mahashankam, a big conch. The name of the conch is Poundrami, which is a very huge conch. Such a huge conch only he can lift. Bhima also blew. Then others also blew their conches. Anantavijayam Raja. Kuntiputro Yudhishtiraha. Nakula Sakadevasya. So Gosama and Pushpa Kavam. Yudhishtiraha. Anantavijayam. You have to supply the word Dhadma. So from the previous loka, he blew. Yudhishtiraha. One who is in firm battle. Yudhishtiraha means one who is firm in battle. Yudhishtiraha. One who does not lose his balance at all. For example in games and all. We do not lose our balance. So same also in the war field. And who is Kuntiputraha. Son of Kuntiputraha. He blew his conch. Anantavijayam. He is Kuntiputraha Yudhishtiraha. He blew his conch. That is called Anantavijayam. Anantavijayam is ever victorious. Then Nakula Sakadevasya. Sugosha. Manipushpa Kavam. Nakula and Sakadeva. Also blew their conches. Nona Sugosha. And Manipushpa Kavam. These are the names of those two conches. Nakula and Sakadeva. 17 and 18. Kashiya Shchaparamesh Vasa. Shikhandi Chama Harata. Vrstadyum Novirata. Satya Kishchapa Rajita. Drupada Odrapadeya. Sarvasya Prativipate. Savvadras Chama Bhahu. Shankandadmupratak Pratak. These people are also again. They blew their conches. Who are those people? Kashiya Shchaya. Kashiya Shchaya Raja. Kashi Raja. The king of Kashi. Who is he? Paramesh Vasa. A great archer. Who will say very big bow. Mahesh Vasa. And Shikhandi. Shikhandi Baitavout to kill Bhisma. There is a story also behind Ambika and Ambalika. There is a side story. I am just skipping that. And Maharatha. He is a great warrior also. Kashi Raja. Vrstadyum Novirata. Satya Kicha Aparajitaka. Satya Ki. Who is never defeated in war. Ever winning. Drupada Drupati's father. Drupadeya Asya. The five children of Drupati. All these people are all included in that. Savvadras Chama Bhahu. Savvadra. Savvadra is Karsanis Abhimanyu. Mahabahu. He is a person with great arms. Bujabala. Very strong. All these people. Shankandadmupratak. Also. Pritak Pritak. Again and again. Separately. Distantly. You can hear from the sound. Who blows what conch. Sarvasakha. From all directions. Prithivipate. Now we have to know who is being addressed. Sanjay is addressing to Dhritarastra. So Prithivipate. Oh lord of the earth. He is calling Dhritarastra. Oh king. Lord of the earth. Sanjay is addressing to Dhritarastra. This is what is happening. What happened in the beginning? He described up to this. Dhritarastra. Chloka 19. Sago shoddhartha rastranam dhartha rastranam vrdayani vedharayatim namascha prithivin caiva tumulobyanunada yannem What was the response to the Kauravas? When the Pandavas blew their conches? First the Kauravas blew. Starting with Bhisma. Then Pandavas blew. What was the reaction of the Kauravas? They were all tremendously frightened. Bhisma Charya only started the blowing of the conches. Immediately Pandavas followed because when he gave the green signal these people were already and the Kauravas as they heard the sound of the Pandavas, the conches. They were frightened. That huge noise of the conches produced from the Pandavas army dhartharastranam prithivin caiva vrdayanayate it broke, tore apart the hearts of all the dhartharastras the Kauravas dhartharastrasya putraha dhartharastraha not only that, the noise spread the sky and was reverberating also through the entire sky. namascha prithivin caiva venunada yannem anunada means echoing. nada is sound. anunada is sound after sound. So prithinada prithivin echoing both on the earth and the sky this huge noise from the conches tore apart the heart of the strength of the Kauravas. They were all frightened. Now blowing the conches is also over and what is the next item now? Armies are aid. Signal is given. Both parties have responded. What next? Only war. They should shoot arrows. But something else happened totally different. A change of direction. The Asacharya indicates this change of course direction in the next shloka with the starting of the shloka with atha. Atavyavasth... I will explain what is atha. Atavyavasthitan drishvam dhartharastranka piddhvaja ha pravrutte sastrasampate dhanurudhyamya pandavaha prishikesam tada vayakya idamaham hi pathe The actual thing is to be done is shooting the arrows. That is what is to be started now. But on the other hand something else happens. And what is that? Suddenly Arjuna got up from his seat raising the bow. He lifted his bow. I am not ready. The symbol of lifting the bow means I am not ready. I have to do something. So went near Krishna and he said something to him which changed completely the course of this war. Atavyavasthitan drishvam kapidhvaja ha dhanurudhyamya prishikesam vakya maha Arjuna did not immediately start the fight. He saw the whole army once. So, Vyavasthitan dhartharastraandrithva he surveyed the Kauravas who have been arrayed at what time shastra privrata shastrasampate dhanurudhyamya pandavaha shastrasampate privrata when actually he has to shoot the arrows. Sampata means shooting shastra means arrows or weapons. privrata when the time is right for shooting the arrows. Arjuna looked around. Then what did he do? dhanurudhyamya he raised his bow. That means what? Hold on guys, hold on. Oh, so that all people can see. Then he wants to stop the war for the time being so that hold on. Pandavaha kapidhvaja ha kapidhvaja ha means one who is in the flag the picture of Anjaneya that is in Kapi his Anjaneya. Having raised his bow, what did he do? prishikesam yidam vakya maha he said the following words to Lord Krishna prishikesam is Lord Krishna mahipate wo king actually the dhridharashtra addressed by Sanjaya this is what is told by Sanjaya to dhridharashtra what did he speak? this alone is going to be turning point of the war. that is why we see atha vyavasthitan drishtva the word atha. I told you in the beginning I will explain what this atha means there atha means that is what it is turning the turning point. In Sanskrit the word atha would indicate the beginning or it means a change in the course of events atha from the direction of the war so, Gita dialogue is going to come now so, Vyasacharya indicates with atha the deviation like from the railway line they change the line they put this whatever the point so, atha also indicates mangalam also which is Gita. Gita is mangalam so, it is the mangala shastra and Gita is mangala shastra and what did Arjuna say to Krishna? some time Arjuna watch senayor bhayormadhyay prathamstapayamechutam yavade tanniviksheham yodukhamana vasthitan kairmayasakayodhavya aspindranasa mudhyame yosyamananaveksheham yayetetrasamagataha dattarashtrasya durbuddehe yudde priyachi kirsava haam yadukhamana vasthitan yudde priyachi kirsava haam Arjuna said to Krishna what did he say? meretham senayor bhayormadhyay aspindranasa mudhyamechutam yosyamananaveksheham what did he say? he is not lord krishna or anything oh Krishna, warrior, my shawar Krishna is only a driver now stopaya, it is all singular stop me all in singular madhyamapurushaka ekavachana mangalam keep the chariot senayor bhayormadhyay between the two armies and Krishna also listens as a simple charioteer Arjuna yes boss yes boss Arjuna still thinks that he is in charge of the situation the idea is that there is a very big gap between the two armies because this is the olden days they charge running now only sitting in one place and hitting a button starts the war they have to run towards each other and fight and the purpose that he wants to come to the middle of the two armies yavad ethan niriksheham ethan kakham nirikshe I would like to scrutinize clearly observe who are all standing in front of me I want to examine do the survey of the army the kavarava army till I complete my observation yavad as long as I complete the observation so long the chariot must be in the middle of the army so no war can start he has no shine or stage fear any of those things who are these people assembled yodukama nava stitan to fight with me they are all karma they are all the desire to fight me they are all assembled there why should I go there and see them because I have to know with what people I have to fight where aspeen run asamudhyame in this great event of war who are the people I am fighting I want to see them yosyamana nakham vayavakshe I would like to see who are going to fight with me yahad ethe atrasamagataha who have assembled in front of me samagataha all these are all what type of people dharta rastrasya dhurbuddehe priya chikir shavaha unfortunately all these great warriors are here to support duryodhana backing a wrong horse dhurbuddehe dharta rastrasya priya chikir shavaha they want to support dharta rastras the children of dhrudrashtra who is dhurbuddehe adharmik in mind so yudde priya chikir shavaha who want to support in this great war these are all such people this line is very important because here also we find that arjuna's vision is very clear arjuna knows what he is doing so far we said the delusion moha and all that thing is not here at all he knows exactly what he wants to do he does not have moha or delusion he knows that all the people on the opposite side are his relatives he sees them only as having committed adharma he doesn't say dharta rastraha mama prartharaha no dharta rastraha dhurbuddehe if you told they are my brothers cousins then we can say emotion here no these are our dhurbuddehe people adharmikah that is his family personality is not predominant here he doesn't see this as fight between two families at all generally we see the mahabartha war as a war between two groups of the same family but arjuna does not see it that way upto now he is a kshatriya his duty is to protect dharma family may come and go country may come and go they are all anithyam he knows but dharma is something greater and necessary for the survival of the universe mahanaranya prishad very nicely says dharma vishwasya jagadha prathitta loke dharma tam praja upasarpanthi dharma na paapam apanudati dharma sarvampratitti tam tasmahat dharma parama madanthi dharma parama madanthi dharma is superior for the sake of dharma we can wipe out an entire generation since generations are temporary dharma is permanent that is arjuna is not in his emotional personality at all now he is very rational intellectual personality I am a kshatriya kshatatim adharma atayitrayate iti kshatriya that is the definition of kshatriya my job is to protect dharma by punishing adharma his role and vision are very very clear for arjuna now his observation of the kavaravas also is very clear they are symbols of adharma they have been consistently doing one evil after the other to them and if they are adharma all those who support adharma are also adharmic only bishmas, dronas, overall bishmacharya, bishmukhidam he is his pet and dronacharya is guru but they are still with them he indirectly means that they are also adharmic according to shastra not only doing adharma is same supporting adharmic eyes also is same therefore even bishma and drona individually may be acharyas great but they are backing an adharmic person so they are also symbols of adharma only so the duryodhana sara durbudhehe so his blood pressure even goes up how? in front of me this adharma how? in front of me he is a great dharma he is a great warrior in front of me how this dharma can go on so I have to destroy them so no confusion at all so I must fight this attitude in the mind of harjuna is very clear when we emphasize this point he is here next moment we will see how harjuna comes from a kshatriya a dharma gopgoptam protector of dharma he forgets and comes out begins to slide down from his rational vision family thoughts come to him the change vyasacharya wants to bring out clearly so dhartha rastrasya durbudhehe with this attitude he tells krishna to place his chariot between the two enemies and what did two armies and because both are enemies what did krishna do? sanjayya comes and reports to dhritarastra what does krishna do at this point sanjayya watch him he will see him in the next class that is tomorrow this is the end of the video thank you for watching see you next time bye