Shri Guru Bhiyonamaham, Hari Om, Sadashiva Samarambham, Shankaracharya Madhyamam, Asmadacharya Pariyantam, Vande Guru Paramparam, Sadguru Charanarvinda, Bhiyam Namaham. Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 1, I think we did up to Sloka 42 in the last class, we will go to Sloka 43 today. Doshayi Retai Kulagnanam Varna Sankara Karakaihim Utsadhyante Jati Dharmah Kuladharmashya Shashvatah Ketaihi Doshaihi Because of all these doshas that Arjuna described in the last class that we saw, which will cause Varna Sankara Karakaihi, admixture, of Varna or Jati, we can say perhaps, a class, a group. Once that happens, when the Varnas mix up, Varna Sankara, when they are taken, what happens? Utsadhyante Jati Dharmaha. All the Varna Dharmas are also going to be uprooted because the children will not know which Dharma to follow. It is called here as Utsadhana, destruction. Not only that, Kuladharmashya Utsadhyante. And we have to add here, Ashramadharmascha. Varna Dharma, Ashramadharma, Varna Dharma is all the Kshatriya, Vaishya, Sudra, Brahmana and all that. And Ashramadharma is Brahmachari, Gragastha, Manaprasthi and Sanyasi. They are all Varna, Ashramadharmas. So both of them, for example, if one organ is affected, it will gradually affect other organs. Similarly, the Vaidika Dharma also is such that, a well-organized scheme it has, they all will get affected. So it will affect not only at the family plane, it will affect at the caste plane, at the community plane, at the Kuladharmah, Varna Dharma, Ashramadharma, and all Samanidharmas also will get affected. Jati Dharmaha, Kuladharmashya, all of them. And all of them are what? Shashvataha, which has been from beginningless times, all those things were followed for a long time, and they all get spoiled also. This whole thing up to here. Utsannakuladharmana, Manushyanam Janardana, Narakeyanyatam Vasaham, Bhavatithyanushushrumam. So not only the life upon the earth is going to be miserable, but also the life upon the earth is going to be miserable. Because no one has a clear idea of what his or her duties are. Because the set pattern and the guidance of the Shastras are thrown away in this process. Majority are immature in nature. Simple things like traffic rules also, even if you see, it is most interesting, these days, after all the traffic lights and all have come long ago, maybe in some place, in some cities in India, they have a policeman. And for some, maybe a couple of minutes, he might have taken a break. Within that two minutes, the entire place will be set loose. Who knows where one has to go? Nothing will be known and people will all be in confusion and they will do whatever they like to do. So a police has become necessary. That way, if the Shastras give total freedom, the earth will become only a Narakam. Even though Shastram knows that freedom is important. Shastram knows freedom is important and gives total freedom to, for example, a Sanyasi. So it is divided among common people, Brahman, Akshatriya and all those people. There will be no order at all. There will be total disorder. Therefore, there will be Narakam or confusion. Narakam here means confusion. Confusion will be here. And hereafter, what will happen? Manushyanam marana anantaram api narake vasaha. Marana anantaram api. Marana toorvam. Before marana, what happens? We may say, Bhoom o vasaha. He converted the Bhoomi also into Narakam and suffers also. And after death also, he will go to Narakam only. Therefore, Utsannayam kuladharmanam manushyanam. Those people whose family dharmas are totally Utsannayam means he is destroyed. O Janardana! He is now checking with Krishna whether he is awake or sleeping. So he is calling, O Janardana! Are you awake? Are you listening? So he says, because he is talking dharma to him, to Krishna. Narake niyatam vasaha. Living in hell alone, in Narakam alone is the only lot of all these people, all those people. It can be split as niyatam or aniyaatam. If aniyaatam, it is indefinite period. If niyatam, it is definitely a certain period without doubt. They have to live in only Naraka. And Arjuna says, all these are not my conclusion. He is also very profound. He says, not my conclusion. Anushushurumaya. I learnt all these from Shruti Smriti only. Not mine. Shrutim Anushushurumaya. From the Shruti we have heard. And he knows dharma shastra very well. Arjuna is not an ordinary person. Very learned person also. But right in front of adharma, when he is standing in front of adharma, all these people, Duryodhana, Dattarashiras. But he is thinking of the future adharma that will come. He is standing right now in front of adharma. But he is thinking of the future adharma that will come if he fights a war. So in the process, he has forgotten the present one standing in front. Present adharma standing in front. All because of what? Blindness. Because of blindness he is talking even though he is correct. So Gandhiji tells, if a person practices ahimsa out of fear, it is not correct. If I have enough strength, but out of compassion, I don't hurt the others, then it is a value. Here also same thing. Similarly, if Arjuna talks of all these things out of compassion, no problem. But he talks all these out of attachment, out of raga. And so they are not correct. Here the context alone is wrong, not the argument itself. We should be careful. Arjuna is not telling anything untruth. But the context in which he is using it is not right. So Narake Niyatam Vashaham Bhavati Vashaham. Iti iti anusushruma. Sloka 45. aho bhata mahat paapam kartum vyavasitavayam yadra jasukalobhena kantum svajanam udhyataham Kantum svajanam udhyataham He begins his talk with svajana. In the beginning itself he talked about svajana, my people. And he ends his talk also here with svajana. So all the problems are due to what? Svaha, the attachment, my people. He says aho bhata, a great tragedy it is. It is an exclamation indicating extreme sorrow. And what is it? Mahat paapam mahat paapam kartum vyavasitavayam We attempted to commit a very heinous crime. Even mahat paapam, even for the decision to fight the war itself, Arjuna feels as an adharma. Not only killing these people is adharma, but the very decision with which I came here with bow and arrows, that itself to fight, that itself is a crime, he says. It is a maha paapam. Mahat paapam kartum vyavasitah. Or nishitah. We have decided. Why it is wrong? We have decided because rajya sukhalobhena Due to our greed for rajya sukham, we want to win these countries. That is what we see. The very same battle, if it is for greed, for kingdom, it is wrong. That is why he says, rajya sukhalobhena hantum svajanam udhyatah Because of our greed for kingly pleasures, we want to become kings. We are about to kill our own people. But what is the fact? Rajya sukhalobham is not the reason for coming to the war at all. It was based on dharma. He is interpreting it wrongly because of clouded vision. So svajanam hantum udhyatah is a big mistake. And what we find here? That Arjuna not only made the decision that is wrong, he now does not want even to consult Krishna in this regard. He concludes. He does not even want to ask Krishna. What does it show? This shows that Arjuna tries to solve his problem independently. By his own wrong analysis. That means he is not ready to become a shishya yet. We are still in the first chapter. Understand. That is why Krishna is not ready to become a guru also. The guru knows it better. So he lets the confusion roll out. And now Arjuna concludes. Shloka 46 yadimam apratikaram asastramshastrapanayaham dartara ashtaranehanyuhu dartara ashtaranehanyuhu dartara ashtaranehanyuhu tanme kremata rambhavet Let the Kauravas kill me. It does not matter. I will stand here. dartara ashtaranehanyuhu Let the Kauravas. Let them kill me in this battle. It does not matter. I will stand here. Shastrapanayaham Holding their weapons. Let them kill me. What I am going to do? Asastram. I am not going to be Shastrapani. I am going to drop my weapons. And why he says? Let them kill. It does not matter. And according to the rule, if he drops his weapons, they cannot touch him. Generally, a person who doesn't have the weapons with him cannot be killed at all in dharma yudam. Violating that rule, even if they kill me, asastram shastrapanayaham Again, apratikaram. Even when I am not ready to fight back. Apratikaram means to retaliate. Here, apratikaram. I am not going to fight back. So even I am without weapon and not ready, if they still decide to kill me, what do I think? That is the height of his conclusion. That is, shematarambhavet. I consider it as a great blessing. Even then, I will not kill these people. So he has decided not to fight this battle. This is his conclusion. This is of Arjuna's conclusion based on his confusion and all that. So this concludes the moha topic also. So Vyasacharya's aim is to show what? Arjuna's attachment, raga, his grief, shokam, and his delusion, moha. That means what? We told in the beginning itself, samsara is the mixture of all these three. So Vyasacharya successfully shown all the three. He has completed the raga, shokam, and moha. Samsara is complete. So Arjuna Vishadayoga or Arjuna Raga Shokam Moha Yogayati, we can say that way also. So Krishna also cannot talk anything now. He has concluded, Arjuna has concluded. Because Arjuna has made the decision also not to fight the war. Now Sanjaya says something here, the last shloka of the chapter. Sanjayavacham yeva muktvarjuna sankhe rathopastam upashishatem visrjashasharam chapam shokasam vignamanasaham So he addresses Dhritarashtra. yevam arjunaham krishnam muktvar Having said these words to Krishna, arjunaham upavishatem Still Arjuna was standing. Because he said, sidanti mamagatrani If you remember all that, he dropped the bow and arrow and all that. His body is all shivering. Everything was. So rathopaste Now the middle of the chariot where there is a raised platform like a raised platform in the middle of the chariot. Here it is ratha upastham or ratha asana nithyatha That is what we can upastham the asana So ratha asani upavishatam He sat there. How? visrjaham shasharam chapam Having dropped his bow and arrow indicating his unwillingness to fight. And with what emotion? shokasam vignamanasaham Even though he had all the problems of attachment, delusion, etc. The predominant one is what? shoka alone. shokasam vignamanasaham shokena samvignamanasaham With his mind tormented with grief, he sat there on the chariot. So it became a totally different thing now. Started with lot of noise, blowing the conscious and all that. Suddenly you took a different turn. Instead of sitting there, you took a different turn. Instead of a noisy war, it has become a gloomy atmosphere now with Arjuna's grief. With this Vyasa acharya suddenly, intelligently also stops the first chart. He didn't continue here. His purpose is over. Arjuna felt samsara intensely. Samsara I told you right in the beginning itself. Samsara darshanam is most important. And he Vyasa acharya clearly made it that samsara darshanam was very clear to Arjuna. He felt the intensity of samsara. This is the first step for moksha. For moksha, samsara darshanam is the first step. You should recognize you are in samsara. Later Vyasa has to prepare the ground for Arjuna, the samsari, to become Arjuna the sishya. Not directly Jnani. Arjuna the samsari has to become a sishya. So he has to prepare him for that. Only then the teaching will start. Now the sishya tvam has to come out. It has not come out yet. So teaching is not completed. All this will be introduced in the second chapter. And each chapter is concluded by the shloka like this. I am going to read. om tat sadhiti srimad bhagavad-gitaasum upanishadsum brahmavidhyayam yogashastrem sri krishna arjunasam vadem arjuna-mishadayogo namam prathamodhyayaham This will be said at the end of every chapter. om tat sadhati That is mentioned to remember the law. om tat sadhati om also pranavasura refers to the Lord. tat sadhati also Later we will see that om tat sadhati are three names of the law. tat and sadhati om tat and sadhati In the 17th chapter Krishna is going to say om tat sadhiti nirdesha ha brahmanas trividhasmruta ha We are going to see that in the 17th chapter where we will explain this in greater detail. So what is the significance of these three words? Why they should be chanted at the end of any activity? Not only here, any activity. Krishna will give them at that time in the 17th chapter. Here we will just know that om tat sadhati is the name of the Lord and we utter this to remember the Lord at the end of the chapter. We remember him at the beginning and at the end. Why should we remember now? We always view that whatever action we do it will be successful only when there is Ishwara Kripa also. All the time I have told you Prayatnam, our effort is needed. That is not adequate. Ishwara Kripa, that is the Devam factor also has to bless us for us to complete anything successfully. So in the beginning we chant the prayer seeking his Kripa. And at the end also as a gratitude, like a word of thanks. I have completed the first chapter. That's not over. I have completed the first chapter only. And for each chapter I am going to say the same thing. Atat vidiyo dhyayah also we will do the same thing. And what is that we have studied now so far? I am still explaining this particular last section. Iti Srimad Bhagavad Gita suhum This is the text called Srimad Bhagavad Gita. So Gita is a spiritual dialogue between a Guru and a Sishya. There are so many Gitas. Rama Gita, Krishna Gita, Shiva Gita, Avadhuda Gita, Uddhava Gita. So many Gitas are there. And what is its content here? It is not a new textbook. Upanishads. So the content is the same as in Upanishads. In the Dhyana Shloka we said Sarva Upanishadogavaha Dogdha Gopalanandanaha So Gita Upanishad. We already told that name also at that time. And what is the content of the Upanishad? Brahma Vidyayam It is Brahma Vidya. The knowledge of Brahman. Paravidya. The highest knowledge. And not only Brahma Vidya. There is another topic also. Yoga Shastra. Which alone makes Gita superior to Upanishads for ordinary seekers. Because in the Upanishad, Brahma Vidya alone is talked about. For highly qualified students. But that is okay because it is Vedanta. And it is taught to people like Shravana Kama who are already very learned. And renounced everything. It was taught in forest. But Bhagavad Gita is taught very much in the battlefield. Amidst life alone. And also the student is not one who renounced everything. But it is Arjuna. Who is very much in the world with lots of weaknesses of a common man. So the beauty is what? Not only Krishna talks about the highest philosophy. But if the student has no qualification. Krishna teaches how to acquire those qualifications also. Like Karma Yoga. He only hinted in Upanishad. They are all hinted only in the Upanishads. A small amount. But Karma Yoga is a big topic. So Yoga Shastra. The practices or disciplines. For the preparation of the mind. For the realization of the truth. Japa or Tapas, Puja, meditation. All those things which come under Apara Vidya. Apara Vidya is the philosophy. And Apara Vidya is the religion. The practices. All those things. So religion and Apara Vidya philosophy must go together. Which is in the form of Krishna-Arjuna Samvadi. A samvadam between Krishna and Arjuna. Between two equals. If it is two equals. It is called vadaha. It should be clear. Two equals it is vadaha. When it is between the Guru and Sishyam. It is samvadam. In Krishna and Arjuna. It is a samvadam. And what is the beauty here? The teacher is never wrong. You should understand that. Teacher is never wrong. Because teacher doesn't say anything of his finding. He tells only what is given in the Shastras. If he is not teaching. What is in the Shastras only. He can give some examples here and there. But actually even traditionally people won't even give other examples. Whatever is given in the Bhaashya and Sikha. These things only they will give. In circumstances where it may appear wrong. Arjuna will say. I have some confusion. He won't say Krishna you are wrong. That is the difference here. So Arjuna Vishadha Yoga Onamaha. The topic. The yoga. Each topic we call it a yoga. Is Arjuna Vishadha. The whole purpose of the chapter. First chapter. Is to bring out the grief in Arjuna. Then only Krishna can give the treatment. The whole thing started because of Krishna. He could have placed the chariot before Karna. If he placed the chariot before Karna in the battlefield. The arch rival of Arjuna. The war would have come right then. Not even one second will be delayed. Krishna wanted to bring out the ragi or samsari in Arjuna. Krishna is smiling within. Seeing Arjuna slowly coming around. So he laid his trap. And Arjuna is coming around. Or Samsara Darshana Yoga Onamaha. We can call it also. Arjuna Vishadha Yoga. Or Samsara Darshana Yoga also. Pratamodhyaya. The first chapter is concluded. Now we will go to the second chapter. And before we go to the second chapter. Let us briefly summarize. This is how I normally develop my lectures. After completing a chapter. I give a brief summary. In the first chapter. Vyasacharya was preparing the ground for Brahmavidya to take place. We already mentioned. And the preparation of the ground. Is nothing but the Guru and Sishya coming together. And because Brahmavidya should be given. In the form of a dialogue between Guru and Sishya. Sishya should seek. Guru should enlighten him. And there should be Sishya. Who should crave to get out of Samsara. Who will then go to a teacher. Like going to a doctor to get out of a disease. Rogan Vrithartam Vaithya Sameepanam. Similarly. Bhavarogan Vrithartam Guru Sameepanam. One has to approach the teacher. And to get out of Samsara. First I should know that I am in Samsara. That is why we said. Samsara Darshana is important. To get out of Samsara. And then have a desire to get out also. Like knowing a disease. And then try to get out of it. I should go to a teacher here. So here Arjuna is a Sishya. Who discovered that he is in Samsara. And craves to get out of it. So he has to go to a teacher. And the entire first chapter. Described how Arjuna discovered his problems. Or Raga. Attachment. All those things. By using the word Swajanaha. A couple of places. Everywhere almost. He also intensely experiencing sorrow he is. Siddhanti Mamagatrani. Mukhamchaparishushyati. All those things. They are all expressions of his dukkha. So shoka was shown. And moha. The delusion was also shown. When Arjuna started interpreting. Dharma Shastra. And telling that killing the Kauravas is a sin. While it was actually Punyam. Destruction of Adharma is Punyam. All the shlokas. Kolakshaye. Pranasyanti. All those things he said. Misquoting the Shastras also. He is a learned man. But he is misquoting the Shastras. It was not ordinary Raga, Shoka, Moha problem. But it is a very intense problem. That the feeling of Samsara was so intense. That he wanted to get out of it immediately. Somehow or the other. So he needs a treatment in ICU. This was the stage where the first chapter concluded. So with this background. Now we will see the second chapter. Where the developments are going to be very rapid. No more conscious are blowing. All that thing. How is developed by Vyasacharya. We will see it in a nutshell fast. Arjuna wants to get out of Samsara alright. But he still does not know that he needs external help. He thinks that he needs to get out. But thinks that he can do it himself. So self treatment. With his available knowledge. Like looking at a medical dictionary. Symptoms and cures. Unfortunately Samsara disease cannot be cured that way. And so your Guru, doctor is necessary. So Arjuna must discover. That he needs an external help. So they call it the Dina Babaha. The second chapter. His helplessness. Then he will go to Govinda. Krishna will go to Govinda, Gopala. So Uttara, Maam, Dina, Adina, Balahina. All those things he is going to tell. Adina also. So he has to lift. Krishna has to lift me up. He has to surrender. Only when the helplessness is known. Then only surrender to someone. Will become sincere. Till then it won't be. So here Arjuna is going to discover his Dina Babaha. And surrender to Krishna. He then becomes a Sishya. Till then Arjuna is the commander of the chariot. And Krishna is only a driver. Sena yobhya ubhayo matyayam ratamsthapaya He ordered Krishna. He is to a driver. Then this Krishna. He can then teach. If he is master. And not the driver. So the master has to shed his masterhood. And become a humble. Simple. Obedient. Open minded Sishya. The master Arjuna. He has to now shed his masterhood. And become a humble. Simple. Obedient. Open minded Sishya. Sishya should be open minded. Then Krishna can take charge of the reins. And Sishya Guru dialogue will start. So the first portion of the second chapter is. We are going to find Arjuna turning to be a Sishya. And Krishna in turn will become a Guru. So this is how the chapter will develop in the beginning. Then the teaching will start. And we will find three main things here. Actually the whole Gita is given in a nutshell in the second chapter. Like the headlines. This is called Sankshepa. This chapter. Then the body will develop. And it will be controlled ultimately. Again with all the headlines. So Sankshepa first. Then the entire development. And finally again what was said. So the second and the 18th chapters are Sankshepa's chapters. Lakshya. And the third to 17th chapter. They will be elaborated what is said in the second chapter. And also will be concluded in the 18th chapter. Since the second chapter contains the essence of the Bhagavad Gita. Krishna will talk about first Jnana Yoga. Which is the main body of teaching. Because of which the second chapter will be called Sankhya Yogaha. Or Jnana Yogaha. Which is the essence of Vedantic teaching. Brahmavidyaaya. When we put that thing. That is the Vedantic teaching. It is the essence of that. That is Sankhya Yoga or Jnana Yoga. There may be students who may follow Jnana Yoga. And some who cannot follow. Because Jnana Yoga is very very subtle. Very subtle topic. So if a person is not prepared to learn Jnana Yoga. Then Krishna has to teach a science for preparation. That is called Yoga Shastra. As was mentioned in the last class. Known as Karma Yoga. So after Jnana Yoga. Krishna will talk about Karma Yoga. Finally concluding the second chapter. Krishna will talk about the glory of a Jnani. A person who is liberated. Jnani is a person who is liberated. So in the second chapter. What are the topics now we will have? Arjuna becoming a Sishya. First. Then teaching begins with Jnana Yoga. Then Karma Yoga preparation. Mass preparation will come. And finally the glory of a Jnani. A man of wisdom, perfection. That will be said. So this is the four topics in the second chapter. And we should remember. Where we concluded the first chapter also. We should not lose the continuity. Arjuna is sitting on the platform of the chariot. Ratha Upastham. In the miserable condition. And Vyasacharya picks up the thread from there. Atadviti Yodhyaayaham. Sankhya Yogaham. Sanjaya Vacham. Tantata Akrupaya Vishnam. Ashrupooranaku Lekshanam. Vishidantamidam Vakyam. Vachamadhusudhanaham. It is a peculiar condition. That Arjuna is extremely sorrowful. And is not taking any action. Very uncommon of Arjuna. Neither he is ready to fight. Nor he is going back. He is sitting. He is sitting there. Something or other has to be done. It is uncomfortable with silence. Because in the middle of the war. This guy is sitting in between. The two armies. So Krishna has to do something. But he cannot teach yet. Because he has not become a student yet. So these are all various situations. That we have to keep in mind. When we read Gita. If you want to get the full benefit of it. We have to understand everything in context. And then develop the continuity. And see the development. How the logics are developed. Because it is a quite analytical. Very logical Grantha. Various situations that we have to keep in mind. Krishna cannot keep quiet either. Because he has not become a Sishya. He cannot say. Let him call me a Guru. Let him do Namaskaram to me. Then let me start. No. He cannot keep quiet. He has to make this guy. Not comfort to start with. So Krishna has to use some words. Not many many words. But some words. Cannot talk sense into the other person. He cannot talk logic to him now. He has to talk some words. To just only break the silence. Since his intellect is blunted. Arjuna's intellect is blunted. His intellect is overpowered by grief. He cannot give a sermon now. So here also Krishna has to break the silence. That is what Sanjaya reports in the beginning. First sloka. Sanjaya says. Sanjaya uvvacha. So he says. Madhusudana ha uvvacha. Lord Krishna said these words Arjuna. What type of Arjuna? Kripa ya avishtam. This Samsara. He gives the essence of the first chapter here. So beautifully. Here his condition is. He is overpowered by attachment. Samsara. Another beauty is also given in the word. Avishtam. We talked about the difference between love and attachment earlier. In the case of love. I take to love. I am the one who is free. Love is the one which I willingly show. Love is under my control. I make use of love. And I show love. But in the case of attachment what happens? It is not that I entertain. Attachment. On the other hand. Attachment entertains or overpowers me. This is the difference between. The two. In love. I am the command. In attachment. Attachment is the command. Not me. In case of love. I am free. Love is an instrument of mine. Whereas, in the case of attachment. It is the Master. And I am the instrument. That is why Vyasacharya uses the word. Kripa ya avishtam. He did not invite attachment. invite attachment but attachment without invitation over to Arjuna indicating that he is a slave. One who loves is not a slave but one who is overtaken by attachment is a slave. So we are all slaves of attachment. And once the raga comes, attachment comes, what is the natural outcome? Ashrupurna akula ikshanam. His eyes, ikshanam, were completely blurred, disturbed by the Ashrupurna, full of tears. It is a beautiful poetic way of saying that. Not only it blurred his local vision but his intellectual vision also was blurred which indicates what? Mohan. Confusion, delusion. And what was he doing? Vishidantam, going through intense grief. To that Arjuna, Krishna uttered these following words. What are these words? Let us see. Let us continue. Shree Bhagavanu vacham kutasthva akarsmalam idam vishamesam upasthitam anaryajushtama svargyam akirtikaram arjuna. Krishna understood that the normal method of teaching is not going to work here. Why? Because Arjuna is not a student yet. He is just only an emotional wreck. So Krishna has to use some other method to wake up Arjuna. For this task, time being, he will, some quick fix is okay. So that if he at least turn towards him, it's fine. So Arjuna has to be whipped up into activity. And what is the method? For a Kshatriya, the most important thing is what? His ego or self-respect for a Kshatriya. However much insane he can be, the moment his self-respect is wounded, he cannot take it. Because as will be seen later, he is Rajogudana. He is a Rajogudana. He is a Rajogudana. He is a Rajogudana. He is a Rajogudana. He is a Rajogudana. He is a Rajogudana. Kunaprarana. Whenever Rajogudana is predominant, ego will be there and as a ruler, he will definitely have it. Arjuna may be a great bhakti of Krishna alright? But the moment his ego is hurt, he will react like a snake. Secondly, Arjuna has come to silence now. He thinks he has exhausted his feelings, but Krishna knows that he still has a lot to let out. That has to be brought out. We have got a convention, you know, when somebody is dead or something, there is a convention to go and ask, dukkang ekkar, we call it in Tamil. We go to that place and enquire what happened, how did he die, so he was a great person, all that thing we say. So this practice is essentially to bring out the grief. So when it is done, the person will be crying more and all that thing in the process, more of their grief will be let out. If suppressed, it might even cause great harm to them. So, it pricks him a little bit more. So once Arjuna empties out, he will become fit to learn. So he has to have a clear mind. So Krishna is trying to empty all the unwanted things from his mind. Sri Bhagavanu Vachan, Sri Krishna, what does he say now? Kutastva idam kashmalam samupastitam. From where did this negative thought or this kashmalam, evil thought come to you? Kashmalam impurity. Mental impurity. Vishamesamupastitam. At the wrong time, when? At the wrong time it comes out. At the nick of the moment, then we are ready to fight the war. Vishame, vishamakale. At the wrong time, how did the emotion, emotionalism overtook you? Emotion is nice. It makes us a human being. Of course, sympathy and all good emotions. But emotionalism is a problem. Emotion is okay. Being overpowered, that sanity is disturbed. My sanity. My coolness. My balance. That all get disturbed. Showing love or compassion is fine. No problem. Very good. But when the grief overpowers the intellect, it becomes a weakness. Capacity for emotion is the glory of the mind. Given by God, sympathize with someone who grieves. Have empathy to people. But when it clouds the intellect, it becomes a problem. And what type of emotion? Anarya justam. Is never removed. It becomes a problem. It's a problem. It is a problem of the mind. But when it is removed, it becomes a problem. And what type of emotion? Anarya justam. Anarya justam. Anarya justam. Anarya justam. It is a problem. Anarya justam. Anarya justam. And what type of emotion? Anarya justam. He is never entertained by a noble man. Aryaha means a great man, a noble person who is governed by shastras, goes by dharma dharma. But that means you are becoming an ignoble man now. Wretched person, lowly person. Anarya. At least will it do good after death? A thing like this? Aswargyam. Will never give you swarga palam at all. Neither good for you in the present janma nor in the future janma. Swarga ayogyam. Aswargyam. At least will you get some name and fame? Akeerthikaram. It will never give you keerthi at all. For a kshatriya again, keerthi is important. So for him, Pranamvapi Parithyajya. Manameva Abhirakshathu. Anithyobhavati Pranaha. Manasam. Aachandra Tarakam. That's the philosophy of a kshatriya. Pranamvapi Parithyajya. I will give up my prana. Does not matter. My life. Manameva Abhirakshathu. Self-respect has to be protected. Anam. Why? Anithyobhavati Pranaha. Prana is impermanent. Will go away one day. But Manasam. Aachandra Tarakam. Self-respect will continue even if prana is gone as long as sun and moon are there. Stars are there. So, only when the keerthi is touched, the kshatriya will be affected. So Krishna knows this psychology also. Rama telling Dasaratha about keeping the verse. Otherwise keerthi will be lost. That was the word he said. Dasaratha then accepts for Rama to go to the forest. Same way Kamsa. When the Ashariri tells him about his death, he gets ready to kill his sister. But when it was pointed out that killing the sister will bring Kalangam to his name. He immediately stops. So Krishna indicates akirthi karam arjun. Arjuna does not seem to wake up still. So Krishna gives one more serious dose. Klaibhyam Asmaghamapartha, Naitatvayyupa Padhyate, Shudram Hridayathaur Balyaam Yaktotishthaparanthapa. Krishna uses still stronger words. In normal condition, one anarya, that one word is adequate to wake up a Kshatriya. Keeping the Kshatriya in the head, he takes the word abhizham, abhizham, abhizham, abhizham. He is also adding to his action, abhizham, abhizham, abhizham, abhizham. He is also adding to his action, abhizham, abhizham, abhizham, abhizham. Krishna uses still stronger words. In normal condition, one anarya, that one word is adequate to wake up a kshatriya. He will be enough to raise his arjuna. So Krishna goes for that because he is still sleeping. Don't go to a stage of a klibaha, napumsakaha. Like a eunuch, a person who is a sexless person. Why? Physically you seem to be a purusha, a man. But emotionally with tears etc. on your eyes, you behave like a weakling, a woman. So I am not able to judge whether you are a man or a woman. Such a condition never befits you, Arjuna. He took the guise of a woman when he was undertaking, he took the role of a woman. Even then he could not betray his courage. He was waiting for an opportunity. That is why in the Virata Parva, in Mahabharata, when the Virata Pradesh was attacked by Duryodhana and all these people, when Uttarakumara was frightened, even though Arjuna was in woman form, he said, he said that he would go to fight. Because he is a kshatriya, he teaches the kshatriya. Made even this Uttarakumara who was like a klibaha, courageous by your act, presence etc. and all that thing, he made him to fight the war. So, somebody else I can understand, but never you. Therefore, what should you do, Arjuna? Just throw away this mental weakness of the heart, which is not the characteristic of a kshatriya, kshudram. Lowly, unworthy. Get up. Get ready to fight. So, if Arjuna, his problem is simple emotion problem, this injection would bring him out. Else, if it is a serious problem, let him empty out his emotions. Now, Arjuna will show that the problem is not a simple problem. So, no quick fix at all. So, no Tylenol will work. Arjuna watcham, katham vishmamaham sankhem, dronanchamadhusudhanam, ishivipratiyosyamim, pujarhavarisudhanam, and arjuna sings the same song. How can I kill my people? Katham vishmam pratyotsyami. I am a warrior and fought any number of wars, of course. Arjuna is a great warrior. It is not fear that is my problem. But what I cannot swallow is, how can I fight Bhishma, who brought up the entire Pandava-Kaurava family, the Pitamaha, who is suspected by me? That shows attachment, he asks. Pratyotsyami. How can I fight back him? Even if he hits me, I can never hit him in return. So uses the word praty. And dronanchar, Drona, he is Drona Acharya, my teacher. I have to do service to him. So, Katham Dronam Pratyotsyami. Sankhem in this war. O Madhusudhana, O Krishna. So with what? With sharp arrows. Why? Because what they deserve is pujarhavarisudhana. O Arisudhana Krishna, they deserve to be worshipped. Instead of flowers, I cannot throw arrows at them. Shloka 5 Guruna hathvahi mahanu bhavan Shreyobhok tum vaikshyam apihaloke Hathvartakam amstu guruni haiva Bunjiyabhogan rudirapradigdhan He says, I can never kill my teacher, Drona and all these people. Then I won't win this war. If I don't win, I will not get this kingdom. Duryodhana will not allow me to stay. So what? We will have to stay in the forest. So what? We will not get normal food. We will have to live on roots in the forest and fruits or Biksha. Does not matter. Vaikshyam apihaloke Shreyaha. Even taking to Biksha, Degari, is okay in this world. For a Kshatriya, it is considered extremely lowly. Biksha is allowed only for the other ashramas. Brahmachari ashrama, they have to take Biksha. Sannyasa ashrama, they can take Biksha. Not for Grahastas. He has to give. For Brahmachari and Sannyasi, it is great. Even for Varna Prasthi also, it is glorious. He has lost all the sense of proprietary. Utterly confused person, Arjuna was. Gurun ahatva, not killing the guru by allowing him to survive. And what type of guru he is? Mahanubhavan. Mahan Anubhavahaysya. Whose glory is so great, generations and centuries cannot give birth to a Bhishma or Drona. Instead of preserving them, how can I think of killing them? And even if we kill them, and get the kingdom, and all the Arthakama pleasures, I cannot enjoy. Arthakama amstu gurun ahatva. After killing these gurus, even if I get the Arthakamas, all of them, they will not be enjoyable by me. Why? Unjeeya. I cannot enjoy. Because, Uthira Pradikdhanboga. They are all the pleasures of mixed, strained with blood, of all our relatives. I will be remembering them, when I live in that kingdom. How can I ever enjoy all that pleasures? Shloka 6 Naichat na chaitat vidmakkatarannogariyahaam yadvajayemayati vanojayeyuhum yaanevahatvanajijivishamaham tevasthitapramukhedhartarashtraham Here alone the turning point comes. In the previous shloka also, Arjuna was decisive. He had no doubts. So he never felt like consulting Krishna. He thought he knows the problem, and found the solution too. And in the previous shloka he says, what is the right answer? What is it? I should not kill people. I should go to the forest. Even if I have to live on alms, begging, it doesn't matter. He had no intention of consulting Krishna. So we have to imagine Arjuna's moods now. But in the heart of hearts, he must be feeling. He knows the dharma of a kshatriya. He is not an ignorant person. He knows the dharma of a kshatriya. His consciousness definitely will prick him. And it tells him that these are only emotions. How can you take alms? Biksha. Or in Duryodhana etc. Or Atathai. Because he already called them. We used the word Atathai earlier. Is it not your duty to destroy them? They are very bad people. So there is a dharmic Arjuna, and an emotional Arjuna. So leaving the war, so both of them, this emotional Arjuna and dharmic Arjuna, are now trying to go through this particular dichotomy. So Arjuna must be feeling the tag of war. With this second voice. To be or not to be. Shakespeare has a dharma like this. To be or not to be. So he says for the first time, Nacchaitad vidmat karanoh katharannoh gariyaha Nacchaitad vidmaha katharannoh gariyaha Very important statement. Openly he expresses his doubt. Nacchaitad vidmaha, I don't know. He says, now I don't know. What? Krishna has got a great sigh of relief when he heard this. Because this is Dina Bhava he discovered. He is help plus. He needs help. So katharathu gariyaha. Which one of these two? Fighting or not fighting? Which course is better? Gariyaha. I don't know. Nacchaitad vidmaha. Not only that. Yadva jayayama yathivanoh jayayoh. Another doubt. We also do not know whether we will be victorious in this war. Jayayama. Or no jayayoh. Whether we will not win. We don't know that also in the war. That we will win or not win. So whether we should fight or not, that is not clear. And if we fight, whether we will win or not win, that also is not clear. But one thing is troubling me too much. What is that? One unfortunate thing is that in front of me, dhartharashtraha avastithaha. It is my own cousins that are standing. This is the disturbing factor. Dharma says fight. Immediately my mind says dhartharashtraha avastithaha. By dhartharashtraha he has only one thing in mind. Bhishma and Rona only. But he puts everything out of dhartharashtraha. And what type of dhartharashtraha they are? Yaaan hathva na jiji vishamaha. Killing whom we will never think of living in this world. If we kill Bhishma and Rona, will we ever think of living in the world? Those who are so dear to us. So respectable by us. So such near and dear ones. Pramukhe in front of me. Avastithaha standing. So Krishna is happy. Krishna is happy because from ajnanam, Arjuna has come to samshaya. Doubt. Originally he was totally ignorant person. Confused person. He said I am going to get out of the war. Now he is telling whether to fight or not to fight. So he has come to doubt. From ajnanam he has come to doubt. Then only enquiry will start. That is why they say ignorance is bliss because no conflict. So is with knowledge also. Knowledge also no conflict. But when we are in between these two, there alone we don't know what to choose. Conflict comes only when there is a choice. He knows dharma and at the same time he doesn't want to kill them also. So that is the conflict. Sloka 7. Narali karpanya dosho pakata svabhavaha prichamitvam dharmasam mudachetaha yachreyasyan nischitam bruhitanme sishyastheham shantiham vamprapanam Here Arjuna completes the process of becoming a Sishya. The master of the chariot is gone. And the disciple Arjuna is born. His helplessness is fully relieved. Karpanya dosho upakata svabhavaha svabhavaha means here is the mind, antakara. Normally it is nature, one's nature. But here is the mind the antakara. Upakata means his mind, antakara. Upakata means the mind. Upahatam means stunned. He is completely stunned. Cannot function at all. My mind is not functioning. Because of what? Karpanya dosha. Karpanya means literally poverty. But here it is helplessness. Weakness. Intellectual poverty. So my intellect is not functioning. Dhinabhavaha. So to solve the problem, I need help. For that what I should do? I should surrender. Pricham itvam dharmasam moda chetaha. I am dharmasam moda chetaha. My mind is deluded regarding dharma, adharma. Chetaha means intellect. Moda chetaha, confused intellect. We should remember first chapter where he rattled so much. He spoke about kuladharma, jatidharma, pitra karma, rupta pinda udaka kriya. All those things he said in the first chapter. That means he spoke them all out of confusion and emotion. Not with knowledge. Even then Krishna will not speak. He has to come out and say, I want to be your disciple. Please accept me. Tradition says, If a person does not ask openly, do not give. Ego should go away. For him, his ego should go away. And he should come out and say, please teach me. So he says in first person singular, I am asking you for a solution. He may. He makes it clear in the fourth line again. Aham te sishya ha. I am not asking casually. I am your disciple. Sishya ha. Sadhana yogya ha sishya ha. Root is ya to teach. And ya is added to indicate yogya thwa. So sishya ha means one who is fit to be taught. Sadhana yogya ha. Who is to be fit to be taught? Who is open and humble. Actually there are a lot of sishya lakshanams. I have told this in my other classes. But here maybe I said I could say that he is. He has to be qualified to be a sishya. So we call him a pathra. A vessel. It can be filled up only when it fulfils two conditions. A pathram. A sishya comes with an empty pathram. It can be filled only under two conditions. Number one, it must be below the tap. Water has to be poured from the tap. The pathram should be below the tap. Even if the tap is a plastic tap. And the cup is a gold cup. Doesn't matter. It has to be down. It has to be below the tap only. The idea is what? Those days the rishis were all poor people. They didn't have anything. They were living in the forest with nothing. The kings are rich people. But if he has to learn something from the rishi. Even he has to sit down. When the teacher is seated on a platform. Under the tree they will be sitting on the floor. And number one. This is number one. Number two. The vessel also should be empty. The same way the sishya is on the receiving end. He will be humbled. And that is why to indicate he sits down. The flow from higher to lower level. Knowledge flows from higher to lower level. Not like today gallery system in colleges and schools. The guru stands in the platform. And he has to look up and sit to the student and teach. And when they are not looking. They may shoot arrows at him also. All those things the teacher has to go through. And the teacher has to look down upon the teacher. Sitting well above him. So the teacher has to pump wisdom from the lower level. Up to the height of the gallery system. So he has to pump wisdom. It is against gravity. So the intellect should be empty. Namely I should leave aside my prejudice. Empty means what? I should leave aside my prejudice and all that thing. So this is called pathram. When you pour something. It protects that something from falling. Falling down. So this is called pathram. So the pathram should not have holes and all that. So whatever is taught should not go away. You should be able to retain. Here Arjuna says. I am pathram. My ears are available to you. Fully lend your ears. See he says. Now I am lending my ears to you completely. Actually I was reminded of Shakespeare. In Julius Caesar. Antony. He will tell. When Caesar was dead. He will say. I will lend my ears for a moment. Lend me your ears. So. What do I want now? Now. Whatever is good for me. You tell me clearly. So. So. So. It has two meanings. One is to protect. Another is to teach. You protect me by teaching. We can take it that way. I have surrendered unto you. I have handed over myself to you. You mold me. Surrender requires lot of Shraddha. So. Helplessness alone is not adequate to surrender. Should have faith too. Essentially. Guru Vedanta Vakyadishu Vishwasaha Shraddha. Acharya clearly said. Whatever the teacher teaches. You should have Vishwasa. Shraddha. Shraddha means that. Unconditionally taking the role. As if. That is the ultimate. Arjuna says. Form prapannam. He does. Sastanga namaskaram to Lord Krishna. That is the place where he is now. Putting the scene right now. And now. Let me see. We have maybe a few more minutes. I can take maybe a few more minutes. To. This thing too. What is that? Go to the second. I can do this. One more. This thing also I can teach. Where I am now. Different screen. You have to get that. So now. Krishna has to. Begin the teaching. Because he has already shown. Told that. Chapter 1. So. Form prapannam. He already surrendered. And all that thing is said. So that is over. Now let me go to the next shloka. So Krishna begins his teaching from the 11th shloka only. As we mentioned earlier. He is in that shloka. By pointing out. Your wise man does not worry about anything. And all that thing. See those things are all. We have not said that. We have not gone through that shloka yet. What is that shloka? I have. I have. I have. All that I have told. This is the. Which is. Right. I forgot where I left. You finished with. Karpanya dosha. Karpanya dosha. Left right. Eight. Eight shloka nine. No we have to start with eight. Eight. From nahi prapashyami. You have to start mama. That is where I should start. I do not know where I left it. Because I. Nahi prapashyami namah aramike veela. Nahi prapashyami namah. I do not know where is that. Number eight mama. Number two eight. Number two eight. Number two eight. My time it is taking me to two thirteen. Somewhere I do not know. I have to get it somewhere. Two eight. We have to talk with two. No he is. 2.8. 2.8 I mean 2.10. 2.9 10. Yes mama. Yes mama. 2.10. 2.10. Now I got it. Yes mama. Because this is a new computer. I am trying to still play with it. Nahi prapashyami mamah panudhyat. Yachokam uchchoshanam indriyanam. Avapya bhuma vasapatnam rdham. Rajyam suranam apichadi patyam. Naha prapashyami mamah panudhyat. Yachokam uchchoshanam indriyanam. Avapya bhuma vasapatnam rdham. Now Arjuna says who is surrendering to the Lord? Why he is surrendering to the Lord? Not that I surrender for any other reason. I am not able to find any solution. And because of helplessness I surrender. Once again he ascertains that. Aham na prapashyami. I do not find any solution at all. That is why I am surrendering. That little bit of ego is there. If there was any little solution, if I think it is there, I would not have surrendered. He still thinks that he may be able to find solution. He thinks that he may be able to find solution. Yachokam uchchoshanam indriyanam apanudhyat. By which my sorrow will be completely eliminated. So he understands he has sorrow. And he does not find a solution. So I want a solution by which my sorrow should be eliminated. So that is his, his, the swartha is also there. So apanudhyat. That means eliminated. Will be eliminated. What yachokam my grief. I do not see a way out. So if it is a simple casual sorrow, it may go away maybe in a couple of days. But this is not a tolerable sorrow. But it is intolerable one. So asahya dukkham. It is. So he says uchchoshanam indriyanam. This grief which dries up, burns every sense organs of me. Which is an indication of in the intensity. How much burning it is. Scorching it is. Uchchoshanam. Burning up. Drying up. So even if you give me as compensation all the three lokas, it will not remove my grief. So he says, Bhoomo rajyam avaapyaapi. Even if I get a huge kingdom upon earth. And what type of kingdom? Asapatnam and Ruddam. It is unrivaled. Without any enemy. Sapatnaha means a kingdom without any enemy at all. Peaceful kingdom it is. And Ruddam means samriddam. A prosperous one. There is no need to worry about it. There is no need to worry about it. There is no death of anything. Even if I have all these riches, that will not solve this problem. Suppose in return, not only the earthly kingdom, but the heavens itself. He says, suranam adipathyam api. Even getting the rulership of the Devas. Suras. Asuras. Adipathyam means lordship. Kingship. So even if you make me Indra, it will not solve the problem. This is very important. Since Arjuna is ready to renounce even the swarga loka for the sake of his solution. What exactly, how much you want to give up for achieving this, that shows the intensity of your desire. So this is what is given in Tatva Bodha also. It is said very clearly, Iha amutratha pala boga viragaha. Pairagyam definition. That is what Acharya said. Iha amutratha amutra. Iha amutra. Arjuna said this. Harna boga viragaha. For the sake of self-knowledge, I am ready to sacrifice kingdom or heavens also. That shows the intensity of Mumukshuthavam that he has got. The intensity of anything is measured by the extent of one's willingness to sacrifice. For example, if I want to go to Gita class, if it is near I will go. If someone picks me up, perhaps I will go. If it is not that, I can see it for next week, So intensity is always measured by the readiness to sacrifice or vairagyam. In Kathopanishad we will see when Nachiketas has the self-knowledge, Yamadharma Raja gives him house, all the riches, so many things he gives. But he refuses all of that. Here Arjuna shows his intensity to sacrifice, to renounce even Surana Madhupatyam. That means he has Vivekam and vairagyam also. That means not only he is a Sishya, he is a fit Sishya, he is an Adhikari. So Samadhi Shatka Sampatti, he has some problems, he will say later, but Vivekam and vairagyam and Numukushruthvam he has. In Samadhi Shatka Sampatti he lacks a few things, that we will see. That is why Krishna will teach. With this Arjuna has offered himself and became a Sishya to Lord Krishna. And Krishna will rise to the occasion, relinquish his charioteership and become a Sishya to Lord Krishna. And it is a wonder because when he has the self-knowledge, instead of itching to give, he waits. Later Arjuna himself will wonder, I never knew that you knew so much. He is going to wonder at Krishna. I never knew that you know this much, O Krishna. I thought you are another playmate of mine. So now Krishna the Guru comes to the forefront. Since Arjuna stopped and Krishna has not started yet, Sanjaya intersects and he says, I am going to take you to the next shloka. The next two shlokas. Sanjaya uvvacha eva muktvagrishi kesham gudakesh parantapa nayodhya iti govindham Uktva tusnim vabhuvakha tamuvachakrishi kesham prahasannivabharata sena yurubhayur madje kshidantam idamvachaham Somebody else is already reading? I don't know. Somebody else is already reading? I don't know. Somebody else is already reading? I don't know. Somebody is already reading? Sanjaya reports here. Gudakeshah parantapa eva muktva Gudakeshah and Parantapa both refer to Arjuna. Gudakeshah means we have already seen one who is alert and very sattvic person. He is the conqueror of sleep also. Parantapa ha paran shatrun tapayeti iti parantapa ha one who is capable of destroying the enemies. So both are his names of Arjuna. And it is a peculiar adjective. Arjuna could destroy all the enemies out of the form of Krishna. This is the same. This is the same. the enemies outside. But when Saro attachment, the enemy, the inner enemies are there, he does not know how to destroy them. So he is Bahiyaripoon Tapayati. He can kill one of all the Bahi enemies, outside enemies. Antara Shatravaha, Antara Shatravaha, inner enemies he can call Raga, Dvesha, Prada, Mohamad, Matsaryadis. He cannot. He does not know how to destroy them. Since the local arrows will not destroy them, one needs Aham Brahmasmi iti astram. One has to know that arrow. Not the local arrows cannot destroy that. This Aham Brahmasmi, that astram has to be there. Inner enemy of Samsara can be destroyed only by Brahmasram, Brahma Jnanam only. Aham Brahmasmi is the astram. Sacha Narjana, Krishikesham, Evam Uktava, addressing Krishna, how he, evam, thus, how he addresses. He means, as was mentioned before, I am the one who is the one who is the one who is the one who is the one who is the one I am surrendering, etc. And what he says, nayose iti uktva ." I will not fight, nayose. All the, at the same time, I will not go away from here also. Earlier he was willing to go and take bhiksha. Now he said, I will not go away from here but I don't know. I will not go away from here but I will not fight. Because I don't know which is correct. So there is a stay autumn. You have to tell me what is correct. Then only i will move iti govinda muktva thus telling lord govinda, Krishna, in the name of Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Krikshikesham govindam. Krikshikesham govindam. They are the names of Krishna. Govindam muktava. Tushnim babuvaya. He remained silent. Quiet. Kha means the indication of the touching situation. Here the grief struck Arjuna. It's an exclamation mark. That Arjuna who was struck by grief, he asked this question and sat quiet. What is the time now? We are past. So we'll go to Sloka 10 also if I can. Yeah. Maybe I will go to Sloka 10. So I'll finish this. Maybe I will take it because this is another topic also is coming here. So let me put it. If I can take another five minutes, okay? Yes, Mama. Krishna is going to talk to Arjuna. So Sanjaya says here, Lord Krishna, he addresses Arjuna in the following manner. Tam uvacha. Next Sloka onwards, the teaching is going to start from the 11th Sloka onwards till the 18th chapter, 78th Sloka, sorry 68th Sloka. Krishna taught and taught and taught till Arjuna, Krishna taught and taught till Arjuna. Arjuna could say, nashto mohaha smriti labdha in the 18th chapter. Yes, my moha is gone. Please leave me. I got everything I need to get. Till that time Krishna is not going to leave him. For a teacher, it is a challenge to make even the dullest student to say nashto mohaha. My delusion, doubt, etc. is gone. He cannot say, I have taught. Teacher cannot say I have taught till that person genuinely says my mohas, my doubts are gone. Whatever you got, you have to do. Whatever is according to your prarabdha, etc. That is not proper attitude. Teacher cannot say, okay, whatever you understand is all driven by your prarabdha. He cannot say that. The teacher also should have that honesty and sincerity. Krishna is that, that ideal teacher. He will teach till Arjuna says, nashto mohaha. My moha is gone. And what are the conditions of Krishna? Krishna, what are the conditions of Krishna now? If he is also the same condition like Arjuna, Siddhanti, Mamagathrani, Mukamcha, Parishadrishati, all that thing, then both can cry together only. If the teacher also is like the student. Because one baddha purushaha, bound person cannot leave another baddha purushaha. The blind leading the blind only it will be. So one samsari cannot get another samsari out of samsara. But Krishna does not have the problem of samsara. He was prahasan, having still that smiling face. He still smiles. He sees all this grief of Arjuna, still prahasan even. We are going to talk about that even later. So the contrast, Arjuna was having the miserable face indicates samsara dukkha swaroopa. And Krishna was smiling means no samsara, ananda swaroopa. That is the teacher. Now the dialogue is going to take place between the ananda swaroopa Krishna, the guru and the miserable dukkha swaroopa Arjuna, the student. You know how we are developing this, you understand? So always guru should be in such a condition. Otherwise sadguru will become sadguru. Sadguru, if you write in English, you will become sadguru. You will become a sadguru. When the sadguru teaches the sishyak, you will become sadguru. Similarly, Srimad Bhagavad Gita should not be Srimad Bhagavad Gita. Srimad Bhagavad Gita. So guru should not be mad, should not be sad, must be prahasan, smiling, indicates moksha. And grieving indicates samsara. So also Krishna was smiling because for him the teaching is going to be effortless. Krishna doesn't have to put any effort at all to teach. If he is tensed up, it will not work. The sishya feels that samsara is something very difficult to get out of. Then moksha is going to be very difficult. But the guru is going to say that it is the easiest job. Later Krishna will say, susukham kartum avyayam. Because moksha, ananda is not something far away. It is one's own. It is one's own true nature. It is yourself. It is only turning the attention from anatma to atma. Very simple transition. So Krishna is going to effortlessly teach. That is indicated by prahasan, smiling. Even though he is taking so many chapters, but he is doing all that effortlessly. Also Krishna must be happy that his mischief worked. Because where he put the chariot? In between? Right in front of Bhishma and Drona. He would have put in front of Karna. But the intent was to not to give Bhagavad Gita. So he placed the chariot right at the place. So his plans worked. So Arjuna discovered samsara. And he has surrendered. So he was smiling till Arjuna finally came around. So teacher, the student has become eligible now. At the same time, Sanjaya says prahasan eva. I told you I am going to explain that eva. It is not as though he is laughing etc. But like smiling. Because when my near and dear is grieving, one should not show happiness. When somebody is grieving, you don't show happiness. So even though Krishna feels like laughing at the stupidity of Arjuna, he will say later that it is a silly thing. To sympathize with Arjuna, he was not completely smiling. But smiling as though prahasan eva. Smiling is there, but no teeth is seen. There is a little tinge of smile, but there is no teeth seen of Krishna. Bharata. Bharata here refers to? Dhritarashtra. With the smiling face, Lord Krishna addressed Arjuna where? Senayor ubhayor madhyay vishidantam idam arjuna. Sanjaya shows the contrast. Krishna is what? Prahasan. Arjuna is what? Vishidantam idam arjuna. The grieving Arjuna, the samsari Arjuna. Idam achaha. The following verse. The eleventh sloka onwards, those verse he is going to be talking about. Senayor ubhayor madhyay. The first sloka is the one that is going to be talking about the two forces. Arjuna did not even have the patience to go somewhere. To a quiet place. The urgency of the solution is so much that we will finish solving the problem right here itself. Krishna don't tell come to Dwaraka or come to my palace. I will sit and teach. No need. Teach right here. Right in this place to me. Because it is so urgent for us. So the teaching is going to take place between Krishna, the teacher. Not charitir anymore. The relationship is gone from the previous sloka itself. And Arjuna, the disciple. And what did Krishna teach? From the next sloka. We will see in the next tomorrow. .