(0:00 - 4:52)
Vigurubhyo Namaha Hari Om Eshwaro Guru Raatmeti Murthy Bheda Vibhaginem Vyoma Vatyapta Dehaya Dakshina Murthaye Namaham Bharati Karunapatram Bharati Padabhushanam Bharati Padam Aarudham Bharati Teertham Ashrayem Vidya Vinaya Sampannam Vita Ragham Vivekinam Vande Vedanta Tattvagyam Videshekara Bharatim Sadguru Charanaravinda Abhyam Namaham Dhyanashloka, somebody. Vigurubhyo Namaha Haritaya Pratibodhitam Bhagavata Nathaya Nenasvayam Vyasena Kritisam Puranamunina Madhe Mahabharatam Advaitam Ritavarshanim Bhagavatim Ashta Dasa Dhyayinim Ampatvam Anusandha Dhami Bhagavat Kite Bhavat Veshinim Namostu Devya Savishala Buddhe Kullaravindayatapatranitra Enatpaya Bharata Tailapurnaga Prajvalito Jnanamaya Pradeepaha Prapanna Parijataya Totravetraikapaneye Jnanamudraya Krishnaya Geetamrta Dukhe Namaha Sarvopanishadokavaka Durga Gopalanandanaka Partho Vatsat Sudhirbhokta Dugdhangi Tamrta Mahat Vasudeva Sutam Devam Kamsa Chanuram Ardhanam Devaki Paramanandam Krishnam Vande Jagadgurum Bhishma Dronachata Jayatra Thajala Gandhara Nilotpala Shalyak Raghavati Kripena Vahani Karnena Velakula Ashwathama Vikarna Ghora Makara Duryodhana Vartini Sotirnakalu Pandavairana Nadi Kaivartaka Keshavaka Parashatya Vachasarojam Amalam Geetartha Gandhotkattam Nanakhyanaka Kesaram Parikatha Sambodhana Bodhitam Lokesajjanashatpadeiraparaka Pepeyamanam Muda Bhujadbharata Pankacham Kalimala Pradbhamsinashreyase Mukham Karoti Vachalam Pangunlangayate Girim Yatrupatamaham Pande Paramahandam Adhavam Yambrahma Varunendra Rudram Arutaka Stupan Stunpanthi Devyaistavaihi Vedai Sanga Padakramopanishadaihi Gayantiyam Samagaha Dhyanavasthita Tadgatena Manasa Pashyantiyam Yoginaha Yasyantanna Vidusura Surasuraganaha Devayatasme Namoha Chapter 2, Sloka 66 onwards, somebody else Naasi Bhutira Yuktasya Nacha Yuktasya Bhavanam Nacha Bhavaya Tashanti Ashantasya Kutasukam Indriyanam Hicharatam Manon Vidhiyatem Tadasya Harati Pragnyam Vayurnavami Vambasi Tasmadhyasya Mahabaho Nidrihitani Sarvasaham Indriyani Indriyaarpevyaha Tasya Pragnya Prakrishnita Yanisha Sarva Bhutanam Tasyam Jagati Samyami Yasyam Jagati Bhutani Sanisha Pashyato Muneh Apuryamanam Machalapradishtam Samudramapa Pravishanti Advatadvat Kamayam Pravishanti Sarve Sashanti Maapnotina Kamakami Vihaya Kamanya Sarvan Komam Sharati Nisprigaham Nirmamo Nirahankaraha Sashanti Madhigachati Esha Brahmi Sthiti Partha Nainam Prapya Vimukhyati Sthitvasyam Antakaalepi Brahma Nirvanam Richchati Om Tat Saviti Srimad Bhagavad Gita So Upanishad So Brahma Vidhyaya Yogashastra Sri Krishnarjuna Sambhade Sankhya Yoga So before going into the third chapter let us outline the second chapter what we have seen so far. So second chapter is the summary of the entire Bhagavad Gita. 

All important topics have been introduced here and each of these topics will be taken for elaboration from the third chapter onwards. So we can divide the second chapter broadly into four sections. One, Arjuna becoming a student.

(4:53 - 5:30)
The first ten shlokas surrendering to Lord Krishna. I surrender to you O Lord Krishna you give me what is good. An important step in Vedanta Shastra. 

This is called Guru Upasadanam. A student has to approach a teacher and request for knowledge. Then only it should be given.

(5:30 - 6:07)
These days we don't do those things. But this is traditionally as given in the Shastras. For example in the Brahma Sutra this is introduced by Atato Brahma Jignasa. 

So this is the first Sutra. And the second topic is from Shloka 11 where Krishna begins the teaching up to Shloka 39. This is the wisdom of Sankhya.

(6:07 - 6:36)
This is the 39th Shloka. This is the central and most important part of the second chapter. This is called Sankhya Yoga. 

Here we get the discussion of Sankhya Yoga or Jnana Yoga which is the content of the entire Upanishads. A summary of the Upanishads. And what is the content of the Upanishads? Atma Anatma Vivekaha Atma, whatever is not Atma is Anatma.

(6:37 - 6:51)
Atma Anatma Vivekaha clearly distinguishes both. Atma is Nityaha Sarvagataha all pervading Nirvikaraha without any modifications. Jnana Janma Marana Raghitaha without any birth or death.

(6:52 - 7:16)
While Anatma is subject to Balyam, Kaumaram, all those stages of life. Birth, death, it is subject to ups and downs all those things are for Anatma. Sankhya Yoga Body will have health and sickness issues.

(7:16 - 7:52)
Will go away. Another body will come. All these are in the game. 

Never complain about them. It is the nature of Anatma. This is the essence of the Upanishads given in the second chapter. 

And the third topic is from Shloka 39 to Shloka 53 up to Arjuna's question, the third topic it is also equally important, Karma Yoga is given here. Krishna calls the Karma Yoga here not as Karma Yoga but as Buddhi Yoga. It is a different terminology only.

(7:52 - 8:28)
Jnana Yoga is called the Sankhya Yoga in chapter 2 and Karma Yoga is called the Buddhi Yoga also in chapter 2. And there are many important shlokas here. These are all very important shlokas. What exactly is Karma Yoga? How a person should follow Karma Yoga? They were all given there.

(8:29 - 10:08)
In a sense, the Karma Yoga is nothing but learning to accept the Karma Palam without reaction. Karma Palam, Karma Yoga is nothing but to learn to accept that Karma Palam without reaction. So Krishna says, maintaining the equanimity without going through ups and downs. 

Karma Yoga was introduced not as an independent means of Moksha, does not directly lead to Moksha but only a means to come to Jnana Yoga. Lot of people ask me the question, a person he doesn't believe in God and all that thing but he goes on doing social service all along entire life, will he not get Moksha? According to this thing, that's a good Karma Yoga but it does not lead to Moksha. It is only a stepping stone. 

The method of Sadhana is Karma Yoga. Then through Karma Yoga go to Jnana Yoga. Through Jnana Yoga get Moksha. 

This is the order. Not in any other way, this is the only order. I also introduced earlier, Karmi to Karma Yoga, Karma Yogi, Karma Yogi to Jnana Yogi, Jnana Yogi to Moksha. 

So this is also clearly indicated here in second chapter. Karma Yoga will give you a mind which has got Vairagyam. Sadhana Chaturthaya Sampatti, the language of Tattva Bodha, good that we started at the right time, which is the condition, which is the qualification for Jnana Yoga.

(10:10 - 10:23)
This is the third important section. So what are the three sections so far? Preparation or Guru Self-Knowledge. Number three, Karma Yoga or Buddhi Yoga.

(10:24 - 10:45)
Then the fourth topic is from Shloka 54 till the end of the second chapter, which is the topic of Stitha Prajna. Firm knowledge. Prajna is knowledge, Stitha Prajna is firm knowledge. 

This can be called Jnana Palam also. And Krishna gives the characteristics of a Stitha Prajna. How he is, how that person will be.

(10:48 - 11:33)
Atmanyeva Atmanatushtaha. Very very important shloka. That is the basic thing. 

I am happy with myself and all other things are its corollary only. If I am happy with myself, what is the other corollary? I don't depend on anyone for happiness. I am happy with myself. 

I am independent. So freedom follows and I have no desires. Several things were also mentioned as a corollary to this particular idea. 

Dukheshu Anudvigna Manaha Sukheshu Vigatas Prahaha. And later towards the end also, shloka number 70 Apuryamanam Achalapratishtam. It's a very brilliant example that was given also.

(11:34 - 12:20)
Jnani is like an ocean, ever full, accepts all rivers, all kinds of rivers, all experiences enter him but not perturbed by it. And another example also is given, diagonally opposite to Ajnani. For the Ajnani, living itself is a problem. 

He is a Samsari. Jnani is Mukta Purushaha. Ajnani is Samsari. 

Ajnani is the slave of the world and Jnani is the master of the world. So this topic was concluded by talking about Videha Mukti also towards the end. Not only a person enjoys Jeevan Mukti through knowledge, self-knowledge but also he attains Videha Mukti also.

(12:21 - 13:00)
One does not have Punar Janma. He is the all-pervading Brahman with no limitations at all. When I say he, it applies to she also. 

While talking about Sthita Pragya, Krishna makes a small deviation between shlokas 58 and 68. Krishna talked about a few sadhanas which are necessary for becoming Sthita Pragya. Thus Sthita Pragya Lakshanam and Sthita Pragya Upayaha. 

Lakshanam means the characteristics, Upayaha is the means. We saw all of them. So those sadhanas are Shama, Dhamma and Nididhyasana, Vedantic meditation, not Upasana.

(13:01 - 13:18)
One should practice equanimity of mind. Never react under any testing condition. One of the most important value to be followed by a Vedantic student, never get wild, irritated, tensed, angry, all those, they are all mind control.

(13:19 - 14:19)
So then Dhamma, Dhamma is sense control, equally important. So all this control, all the senses. But these two alone are not sufficient. 

Nididhyasana, Vedantic meditation, we should keep the Vedantic knowledge all the time in the mind. I gave the example of Sthai Bhava. Never should be allowed to forget. 

Thus Sthita Pragya Lakshanam, Sthita Pragya Upayaha, that is the fourth topic in the second chapter. So this whole second chapter now can be divided into four topics as I mentioned. Preparation or Guru Upasadhanam, Sankhya Yoga or Self Knowledge, Karma Yoga or Buddhi Yoga and then Sthita Pragya. 

I didn't put it number 1, 2, 3, 4 when I said this because we have to slightly rearrange this order. If you want a proper order, we have to make a little rearrangement. Karma Yoga first, Guru Upasadhanam next, Jnana Yoga third and Sthita Pragya to be the order.

(14:20 - 14:31)
Because even before coming to Vedanta, Karma Yoga should be practiced. Then Sadhana Chaturthiya Sampatthi will come. All the Viveka, Vairagya and all that thing.

(14:31 - 14:42)
Then approach a teacher for getting Atma Jnanam to get Moksha. Till that time the student doesn't even know that I have to get Atma Jnanam. So first preparation is to become a Karma Yogi.

(14:43 - 14:55)
Then approach a teacher and then Atma Jnanam, Jnana Marga and get Moksha. This is the order. So Krishna has not elaborated any one of these topics in this chapter.

(14:55 - 15:06)
He has touched cursorily. Each and every idea are going to be elaborated in the following chapters step by step. Krishna is a great teacher.

(15:07 - 15:23)
They will be repeated many times and so even if an idea is not clear in the beginning, it will be clear in due course. Krishna is following the trend of a real how a person has to talk. Before talking, you say what you are going to talk.

(15:23 - 15:47)
Then talk what you said you are going to talk. And finally conclude what you said so far. So in the next third chapter, Krishna will take up the Karma Yoga for elaboration. 

So the Sankhya topic is left out for the time being. It will be taken up again in the fourth chapter. So the third chapter is titled Karma Yoga.

(15:48 - 15:57)
And this topic was introduced in the second chapter in 2-3 shlokas. The familiar shlokas we know. Karma Niyavadikaras, Temapalesha Kadachana, that is one.

(15:57 - 16:11)
Yogastha Kuru Karmani, Sangam Tikta Dhananjaya. These are 2-2 shlokas which talked about Karma Yoga in a nutshell. So these 2-3 shlokas are going to be expanded and discussed in 43 shlokas.